




Biden condemns Trump as 'climate arsonist' as wildfires burn - as it happened; Democratic contender attacks Trump's climate strategyTrump on climate crisis: 'I don't think science, knows, actually'Biden: Climate change is 'not a partisan phenomenon'Trump to Woodward: 'Nothing more could have been done' on CovidNearly all missing people accounted for as at least 35 killed US firesSign up for our First Thing newsletter
The Guardian (London)
September 14, 2020 Monday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:30
Length: 11688 words
Byline: Kari Paul, and Joan E Greve and Martin Belam
Highlight: Democratic contender attacks Trump's climate strategyTrump on climate crisis: 'I don't think science, knows, actually'Biden: Climate change is 'not a partisan phenomenon'Trump to Woodward: 'Nothing more could have been done' on CovidNearly all missing people accounted for as at least 35 killed US firesSign up for our First Thing newsletter


Body


block-time published-time 1.51am BST 
 Kari Paul  here, logging off for the night. Thank you for sticking with us on these fast-moving news days. Here is what you should know from the last few hours:
    • The justice department is set to investigate the Roger Stone case after prosecutors said they were encouraged to lower the sentence for the former Trump colleague
    • Former Florida gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum came out as bisexual in his first interview since a drug scandal in February
    • An appeals court decided Monday to allow Donald Trump to phase out 'Temporary Protected Status' immigrant humanitarian protections
    • Donald Trump did some gloating via retweet on Monday after a federal judge ruled shutdown orders in Pennsylvania unconstitutional
    • A horrific complaint has been filed against an Ice detention center in Georgia alleging poor Covid safety practices and forced hysterectomies of female inmates
    • The post office is temporarily shutting down some offices in fire-stricken states
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.28am BST
block-time published-time 1.15am BST 
 The post office is shutting down temporarily in fire-stricken states 
As historic and destructive fires continue across the western United States, the USPS has temporarily closed post offices in California, Oregon and Washington due to fire danger and power outages related to the fires. 
enltrAs a result of the wildfires in CA, WA and OR, there are some temporary service disruptions. Please check our service alerts page for complete details.
- U.S. Postal Service (@USPS) September 14, 2020
The fire-related shutdowns come after increased focus on access to postal services as the 2020 elections approach, for which many citizens will be voting by mail to minimize Covid-19 risks. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.27am BST
block-time published-time 1.03am BST 
 More fallout in New York over the suffocation death of Daniel Prude, the Associated Press reports: 
Rochester mayor Lovely Warren fired the city's police chief and suspended her top lawyer and communications director Monday in the continuing upheaval over the suffocation death of Daniel Prude.
Chief Le'Ron Singletary announced his retirement last week as part of a major shakeup of the city's police leadership but said he would stay on through the end of the month.
Instead, Warren said at a news conference that she had permanently relieved him while suspending Corporation Counsel Tim Curtin and Communications Director Justin Roj without pay for 30 days following a cursory management review of the city's role in Prude's death.
"This initial look has shown what so many have suspected, that we have a pervasive problem in the Rochester Police Department," Warren said. "One that views everything through the eyes of the badge and not the citizens we serve. It shows that Mr. Prude's death was not taken as seriously as it should have been by those who reviewed the case throughout city government at every level."
Officers found Prude running naked down the street in March, handcuffed him and put a hood over his head to stop him from spitting, then held him down for about two minutes until he stopped breathing. He died a week later after he was taken off life support.
block-time published-time 12.31am BST 
 Whistleblower complaint alleges Ice detention center is 'like an experimental concentration camp'  
Immigrants in an Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) detention center in Georgia are being subjected to horrific conditions and treatment including "jarring medical neglect" and mass hysterectomies of immigrant women, according to a complaint filed by several legal advocacy groups on behalf of a nurse there. 
Dawn Wooten has worked as a nurse for more than 10 years, three of which she was employed at Irwin county detention center in Georgia, which is run by private corporation LaSalle Corrections. The complaint filed on her behalf on 14 September accused the center of negligence, including poor safety precautions surrounding Covid-19 and generally hazardous and unsanitary conditions. Immigrants who spoke out against these conditions were regularly pushed into solitary confinement, the complaint said. Wooten herself was demoted and reprimanded when she spoke out about these practices. 
 Wooten also reported an alarmingly high rate of hysterectomies - a surgery in which part or all of the uterus is removed - being performed on Spanish-speaking immigrants, many of whom did not appear to understand why they had undergone the procedure. 
She said an off-site doctor supposedly performed the surgeries on women who complained of heavy menstrual cycles, but that many women seemed to not understand what had happened. In many cases nurses obtained consent from patients by "simply googling Spanish," according to the complaint. 
"Everybody he sees has a hysterectomy - just about everybody," Wooten said. "That's his specialty, he's the uterus collector. Everybody's uterus cannot be that bad." 
The complaint details health and safety violations related to the procedures. One woman said she was not properly anesthetized during a procedure and overheard the doctor say he had mistakenly removed the wrong ovary, rendering her unable to have children.  Another went in to have a cyst drained and ultimately got a hysterectomy instead. 
"When I met all these women who had had surgeries, I thought this was like an experimental concentration camp. It was like they're experimenting with our bodies," one detainee said, according to the complaint.
When reached by phone, an employee at Irwin county detention center declined to comment or answer how many immigrants are currently housed there. LaSalle Corrections did not respond to request for comment. Ice did not respond to request for comment. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.00am BST
block-time published-time 11.38pm BST 
 Donald Trump did some gloating via retweet on Monday after a federal judge ruled shutdown orders in Pennsylvania unconstitutional 
District judge William Stickman IV, who was appointed by Trump, ruled orders made by governor Tom Wolf to shut down businesses in the state and limit gatherings were unconstitutional. 
Pandemic policies enforced by the Wolf administration violated the right to freedom of assembly and the due process and equal protection clauses of the 14th amendment, the judge ruled. 
He wrote in his hearing the governor's efforts to slow the spread of the coronavirus "were undertaken with the good intention of addressing a public health emergency" but ultimately were overreaching, arbitrary and violated citizens' constitutional rights.
enltrPENNSYLVANIA GOVERNOR TOM WOLF AN YOUR STUPID WIFE.....YOUR NOT GOING TO MURDER US !!! TRUMP 2020... WE LOVE PENNSYLVANIA ? @realDonaldTrump ? pic.twitter.com/HxzC3VaYIi
 - John Favero (@JohnFavere) September 12, 2020
Trump responded to the news by gleefully retweeting memes and videos praising the decision, including one in which elderly people take off their masks to the tune of 'We're Not Gonna Take It' by Twisted Sister. 
The Wolf administration will reportedly appeal the decision. 
block-time published-time 10.56pm BST 
 An appeals court decided Monday to allow Donald Trump to phase out immigrant humanitarian protections. 
In a 2-1 ruling, a California circuit court of appeals reversed a lower court's decision to block the administration from phasing out Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for people from El Salvador, Haiti, Nicaragua and Sudan.
Hundreds of thousands of immigrants, many of whom have lived in the United States for decades, will now be required to find another way to live in the US legally. 
From Reuters: 
Judge Consuelo Callahan, an appointee of Republican former President George W. Bush, wrote in a 54-page opinion that the Trump administration decisions to phase out the protections were not reviewable and therefore should not have been blocked.
Callahan also rejected a claim by plaintiffs that Trump's past criticism of non-white, non-European immigrants influenced the TPS decisions.
"While we do not condone the offensive and disparaging nature of the president's remarks, we find it instructive that these statements occurred primarily in contexts removed from and unrelated to TPS policy or decisions," she wrote.
The plaintiffs in the case will seek another "en banc" review of the matter, their attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union said. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm BST
block-time published-time 10.19pm BST 
 Former Florida gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum said on daytime talkshow the Tamron Hall Show on Monday that he identifies as bisexual.  
"To be very honest with you, when you didn't ask the question, you put it out there is whether or not I identify as gay," he said. "The answer is I don't identify as gay, but I do identify as bisexual, and that is something that I have never shared publicly before."
Gillum was the mayor of Tallahassee from 2014 to 2018 and ran for governor in 2018, losing narrowly to Republican Governor Ron DeSantis. He checked into a rehab center in February for alcohol abuse after a tabloid published a photo of him passed out in a hotel where a man overdosed and meth was found.
enltrFormer Florida governor candidate Andrew Gillum tells Tamron Hall he's bisexual: "That is something I have never shared publicly before" pic.twitter.com/prUW7NPk1C
 - The Recount (@therecount) September 14, 2020
The interview was Gillum's first since the scandal. His wife R. Jai told Hall she was aware of Gillum's sexual orientation prior to their marriage. 
"What was most hurtful was this belief that I was somehow living a lie in my marriage and in my family," Gillum said. "That was the most hurtful to me. Because I believe we are all entitled to mistakes, and I believe we are entitled to those mistakes without having every other respectable and redeeming part of our lives invalidated."
    Andrew Gillum at a rally in Florida in 2019. Photograph: Wilfredo Lee/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.07pm BST
block-time published-time 9.58pm BST 
 Justice Department watchdog to investigate Roger Stone case  
The Justice Department is investigating whether the sentencing of political consultant and longtime Donald Trump buddy Roger Stone was impacted by his relationship to the president, according to NBC News.
The Office of the Inspector General is looking into allegations that in February prosecutors of Stone were encouraged to seek a lighter sentence than they would have previously considered when sentencing Stone. 
Stone was convicted on seven counts related to misleading an investigation into ties between the Trump campaign and Russia in 2016, including witness tampering and lying to investigators.
All four prosecutors quit when attorney general William Barr tried to override the recommendation of seven to nine years. Stone is a close friend of Trump. 
 Aaron Zelinsky, one of the prosecutors who quit, said when testifying before Congress in June that US Attorney, Timothy Shea was " receiving heavy pressure from the highest levels of the Department of Justice to cut Stone a break, and that the US Attorney's sentencing instructions to us were based on political considerations."
The investigation was prompted primarily by Zelinsky's testimony, according to NBC News. It is not yet clear how far along this investigation is and whether it has surfaced any wrongdoing, the report said. 
    Roger Stone introduces Republican congressional candidate Laura Loomer at an election night event at the airport Hilton in West Palm Beach, Florida, in August. Loomer, a far-right Republican candidate banned from social media sites because of her racist and anti-Muslim speech, is celebrating a congressional primary victory in Florida while embracing her role as a general election underdog in a heavily Democratic district that Donald Trump calls home. Photograph: Allen Eyestone/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11pm BST
block-time published-time 9.44pm BST 
Kari Paul here in the San Francisco Bay area, taking over the blog for the next few hours. Stand by for more updates. 
block-time published-time 9.30pm BST 
 Today so far  
That's it from me today. My west coast colleague, Kari Paul, will take over the blog for the next few hours.
Here's where the day stands so far:
    • Joe Biden criticized Trump as a "climate arsonist" while wildfires continue to rage along the west coast. In a speech at the Delaware Museum of Natural History, the Democratic nominee said, "If you give a climate arsonist four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised if we have more of America ablaze?"
    • Trump received a briefing on the wildfires in California. The president blamed the recent surge in wildfires on poor forest management, even though climate experts have pointed to record levels of heat and drought, which have been attributed to climate change. When a California official pressed Trump on the facts of climate change, the president said, "I don't think science knows actually."
    • Trump dismissed concerns about the possible spread of coronavirus at his indoor rally in Nevada this weekend. "I'm on a stage and it's very far away," the president told the Las Vegas Review-Journal. "And so I'm not at all concerned." But that comment did not address the threat posed to the thousands of Trump supporters who attended the rally in Henderson, Nevada.
    • A senior official at the department of health and human services accused CDC scientists of "sedition." In a live video hosted on his personal Facebook page, Michael Caputo claimed (without any evidence) that CDC officials were forming a "resistance unit" aimed at undermining Trump.
    • The attorney general of South Dakota was accused of hitting and killing a man while driving home from a Republican fundraiser on Saturday. According to the South Dakota Department of Public Safety, Jason Ravnsborg initially told officials he had hit a deer, but the body of Joe Boever was found the following morning.
Kari will have more coming up, so stay tuned. 
block-time published-time 8.58pm BST 
 Caputo accuses CDC scientists of 'sedition'  
 Michael Caputo,  the assistant secretary of public affairs at the department of health and human services, reportedly accused scientists at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of "sedition" over their response to the coronavirus pandemic.
According to the New York Times, Caputo claimed (without any evidence) that CDC officials were forming a "resistance unit" aimed at undermining Trump.  
"You understand that they're going to have to kill me, and unfortunately, I think that's where this is going," Caputo said in a live video hosted on his personal Facebook page.
Caputo also spread baseless claims that left-wing groups were preparing for armed conflict after the presidential election.
"And when Donald Trump refuses to stand down at the inauguration, the shooting will begin," Caputo said. "The drills that you've seen are nothing.... If you carry guns, buy ammunition, ladies and gentlemen, because it's going to be hard to get."
Caputo has recently weathered severe criticism after Politico obtained emails showing the official had sought to change key CDC reports on coronavirus, even complaining that the reports "would undermine the president's optimistic messages about the outbreak." 
 Related:  Trump ally who sought to change CDC Covid reports claims he was fighting 'deep state'
block-time published-time 8.37pm BST 
During the briefing on the west coast wildfires, Wade Crowfoot, the secretary of California's Natural Resources Agency, emphasized that climate change was exacerbating the crisis.
enltr"It'll start getting cooler, you just watch." - President Trump. "I wish science agreed with you" - CA Natural Resources Secretary. "I don't think science knows actually."- President Trump. #NBC7. pic.twitter.com/0tMvYX3IUN
 - Danny Freeman (@DannyEFreeman) September 14, 2020
"We want to work with you to really recognize the changing climate and what it means to our forests, and actually work together with that science," Crowfoot told Trump. 
"If we ignore that science and sort of put our head in the sand and think it's all about vegetation management, we're not going to succeed together protecting Californians." 
The president has previously suggested the recent surge in wildfires was attributable to poor forest management, rather than record levels of heat and drought, as climate experts have said.
Trump responded by telling Crowfoot, "It'll start getting cooler, you just watch."
"I wish science agreed with you," Crowfoot replied.
"I don't think science knows actually," Trump responded.
Shortly after that exchange, Crowfoot sent a tweet with a graphic showing the rise in California's average temperature in recent decades. 
enltrIt actually won't get cooler Mr. President. #ClimateChangeIsRealpic.twitter.com/gYWtitBdcN
 - Wade Crowfoot (@WadeCrowfoot) September 14, 2020
block-time published-time 8.16pm BST 
 Cohn unturned  
When Gary Cohn was Donald Trump's top economic adviser, according to Bob Woodwards first Trump book, Fear, he made sure key pieces of paper were removed from the president's desk, lest he enact policies Cohn thought would be catastrophic.
    Gary Cohn Photograph: Jeenah Moon/Reuters   
When Trump said there were " very fine people " on both sides of a white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia at which neo-Nazis chanted " Jews will not replace us " and a counter-protester was murdered, Cohn, who is Jewish, broke with the president and came close to resigning.
When Cohn did quit the Trump White House, he said it was over Trump's love for tariffs which, as a free-trader, he could not support.
Cohn is a Democrat, and the country is less than two months out from a presidential election which the Democratic nominee, Joe Biden, has cast as an existential battle with a " climate arsonist " president.
Cohn has also watched, with the rest of America, more than 190,000 die from a pandemic the president knew was a severe threat, but chose not to tell the country so immediately. He has watched the US economy tank, under the impact of that pandemic.
But Cohn told CNBC today he wasn't sure who he will vote for in November :
"You know, I honestly haven't made up my mind. I'm really eager to see an economic debate between the two of them. I actually vote on issues.
"We have to have a plan to get back to a more normalised fiscal picture, once we normalise and we get back to a normal economy in the United States. And I really do want to hear where the two candidates are. Just taxing to spend doesn't make sense to me. We have to have a plan to get our fiscal house back in order."
block-time published-time 7.50pm BST 
 Trump on climate change: 'I don't think science knows'  
During the briefing on the west coast wildfires, multiple officials, including California governor Gavin Newsom,  said climate change was exacerbating the disaster.
As one official made this argument, Trump  interrupted to say, "It will start getting cooler." 
However, climate experts have warned the planet will continue to get hotter if greenhouse gas emissions are not curtailed.
But Trump told the officials at the briefing, "Just watch. I don't think science knows actually." 
block-time published-time 7.44pm BST 
 Trump is now attending a briefing on the west coast wildfires,  with California's Democratic governor, Gavin Newsom,  and state and federal officials involved in the wildfire response.
enltrCA Gov. Newsom, in mask to the left, sits with President Trump for briefing on the state's wildfires pic.twitter.com/VGX2Bzx4rS
 - Jonathan Lemire (@JonLemire) September 14, 2020
As the briefing got underway, Trump said of Newsom, "I know we come from different sides of the planet, but we have a great relationship."
Newsom acknowledged the need for improved forest management, which Trump has called for, but the governor added, "We come to the perspective, humbly... that climate change is real and that is exacerbating this."
The president nodded in response but did not directly address Newsom's comment.
block-time published-time 7.36pm BST 
After landing in California, Trump  blamed the recent devastating wildfires on poor forest management, which the president said can cause exploding trees.
enltr"They can explode" -- Trump's attempt to explain how poor forest management leads to wildfires is totally beyond parody pic.twitter.com/8yYmJ7lR8O
 - Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) September 14, 2020
"When trees fall down after a short period of time -- about 18 months -- they become very dry. They become really like a matchstick," Trump told reporters after Air Force One landed in Sacramento.
"They just explode. They can explode. Also leaves. When you have years of leaves, dried leaves on the ground, it just sets it up. It's really a fuel for a fire. So they have to do something about it." 
Just to reiterate: climate experts have blamed the recent surge in wildfires along the west coast on record levels of heat and drought, which have been attributed to climate change.
block-time published-time 7.15pm BST 
 Trump has landed in California,  where he will receive a briefing on the west coast wildfires, which have already claimed at least 35 lives.
"There has to be good, strong forest management, which I've been talking about for three years with the states, so hopefully they'll start doing that," Trump said.
enltrTrump is in California mispronouncing "Oregon" and insisting that wildfires are caused be poor forest management pic.twitter.com/zydXDoe3DT
 - Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) September 14, 2020
Climate experts have said the recent surge in US wildfires is not due to poor forest management, but rather extreme heat and drought along the west coast.
Moments ago, Democratic nominee Joe Biden  warning the fires represent the devastating effects of climate change and criticizing Trump as a "climate arsonist."
block-time published-time 7.02pm BST 
 Joe Biden  closed his climate speech by noting he continues to pray for Americans on the west coast who have been affected by the wildfires. 
"We see the light through the dark smoke. We never give up. Always," Biden said.
With that, the Democratic nominee concluded his speech without taking any questions from reporters. 
block-time published-time 6.57pm BST 
 Biden criticizes Trump as a 'climate arsonist' as wildfires rage  
Democratic nominee Joe Biden  appears to be unveiling a new attack strategy against Trump, arguing the president's climate policies represent a direct threat to the country.
enltrBiden: "If you give a climate arsonist four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised if we have more of America ablaze? If you give a climate denier four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised when more of America is underwater?" pic.twitter.com/pUFhJ4AmgE
 - CBS News (@CBSNews) September 14, 2020
Biden took direct aim at Trump's baseless claims that the Democrat's proposals were aimed at abolishing the suburbs.
"You know what is actually threatening our suburbs? Wildfires are burning our suburbs in the West," Biden said. "If we have four more years of Trump's climate denial, how many suburbs will be burned in wildfires?"
Biden went on to say, "If you give a climate arsonist four more years in the White House, why would anyone be surprised if we have more of America ablaze?"
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.58pm BST
block-time published-time 6.48pm BST 
 Biden: Climate change is 'not a partisan phenomenon'  
 Joe Biden  criticized Trump  for injecting politics into his natural disaster response, after one former senior administration official said last month that the president previously wanted to withhold wildfire relief from California because it did not vote for him.
"Here's the deal: Hurricanes don't swerve to avoid red states or blue states. Wildfires don't skip towns that vote a certain way. The impacts of climate change don't pick or choose," Biden said. "That's because it's not a partisan phenomenon. It's science." 
Biden once again argued Trump had "failed the most basic duty to a nation" because he had failed to protect the American people.
"This is another crisis, another crisis that he won't take responsibility for," Biden said, comparing Trump's response to the coronavirus pandemic to his response to climate change.
Altering an attack line from the president, Biden went on to say, "It's clear that we're not safe in Donald Trump's America."
block-time published-time 6.38pm BST 
In his speech on the wildfires, Democratic nominee Joe Biden  argued America had to take decisive action to address climate change.
"We have to act as a nation," Biden said. "It shouldn't be so bad that millions of Americans live in the shadow of an orange sky and are left asking, is doomsday here?"
The Democratic nominee noted the wildfires were part of a recent pattern of devastating natural disasters, ranging from hurricanes to intense drought.
"I know this feeling of dread and anxiety extends well beyond the fires," Biden said. "It's happening everywhere, and it's happening now - and it affects us all."
block-time published-time 6.34pm BST 
 Biden delivers remarks on wildfires and climate change  
Democratic nominee Joe Biden  is now addressing the west coast wildfires and climate change in a speech at the Delaware Museum of Natural History.
Biden said he was praying for those in California, Oregon and Washington state who had been affected by the wildfires.
The Democratic nominee lamented the "undeniable acceleration of the punishing reality of climate change on our planet and our people." 
block-time published-time 6.20pm BST 
 Today so far  
Here's where the day stands so far:
    • Trump is traveling to California to receive a briefing on the wildfires, which have already claimed the lives of at least 35 people. The president will also participate in "a Ceremony Recognizing the California National Guard."
    • Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks on the wildfires. The Democratic nominee will give a speech on the wildfires and the "urgent need to address the climate crisis" in his hometown of Wilmington, Delaware.
    • Trump dismissed concerns about the possible spread of coronavirus at his indoor rally in Nevada this weekend. "I'm on a stage and it's very far away," the president told the Las Vegas Review-Journal. "And so I'm not at all concerned." But that comment did not address the threat posed to the thousands of Trump supporters who attended the rally in Henderson, Nevada.
The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.
block-time published-time 6.05pm BST 
 South Dakota attorney general kills a man in car accident  
The attorney general of South Dakota, Jason Ravnsborg,  struck and killed a man on Saturday night while driving home from a Republican fundraising dinner. 
The Republican governor of South Dakota, Kristi Noem,  said during a press conference yesterday that Ravnsborg had been involved but uninjured in a fatal car accident, but she did not provide further details.
The South Dakota department of public safety said this today, per the Rapid City Journal :
 Ravnsborg, a 44-year-old from Pierre, was driving a sedan westbound on U.S. Highway 14 on Saturday night. He told the Hyde County Sheriff's Office that around 10:30 p.m. he hit a deer a mile west of Highmore. 
The release does not say if Ravnsborg stopped to confirm that he hit a deer or inspect his vehicle for damage. It also doesn't say if Ravnsborg called 911, the non-emergency line or someone from the office. The Journal has requested audio recordings of this call and all other calls related to the crash.
The body [of] Joe Boever, a 55-year-old from Highmore, was discovered the next morning. The release does not say where Boever was found and who found him.
block-time published-time 5.56pm BST 
 ABC News will host a town will with Trump tomorrow,  two days before Joe Biden  participates in a CNN town hall in Scranton, Pennsylvania.
ABC said in a statement, "Chief Anchor G eorge Stephanopoulos will anchor the event, which will provide uncommitted voters a chance to ask the President their important questions before voting."
The event will be held in Philadelphia, so both Trump and Biden will be in Pennsylvania this week, as the two politicians seek to win over undecided voters in the crucial swing state.
Trump won Pennsylvania by less than 1 point in 2016, becoming the first Republican presidential candidate to carry the state since 1988.
But recent polls have shown Biden leading Trump by several points in Pennsylvania, buoying Democratic hopes that he will flip the state in November.
block-time published-time 5.29pm BST 
In his August conversation with Bob Woodward, Trump  was also clearly more focused on the US economy than Americans' health.
In the audio released by CNN, the president asks Woodward, "So you think the virus totally supersedes the economy?"
"Oh, sure. But they're related, as you know," Woodward replied.
"A little bit, yeah," Trump replied.
"Oh, a little bit?" Woodward asked.
"I mean, more than a little bit. But the economy is doing -- look, we're close to a new stock market record," Trump said. 
When Woodward told Trump that there were parts of the book he would not like, the president again said, "You know the market's coming back very strong, you do know that."
"Yes, of course," Woodward said.
"Did you cover that in the book?" Trump asked. 
Democratic nominee Joe Biden  has repeatedly insisted that the economy will not truly rebound until the country gets the virus under control.
According to the jobs report released by the labor department earlier this month, 29 million Americans are currently receiving some form of unemployment aid.
block-time published-time 5.22pm BST 
 Trump to Woodward: 'Nothing more could have been done'  
Speaking to journalist Bob Woodward  last month, Trump  insisted he could not have done anything more to help the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Woodward, whose new book "Rage" is being released tomorrow, said during the conservation that the presidential election would be a race between Trump, Joe Biden  and "the virus."
According to audio released by CNN, Trump responded by insisting he had "acted early" to mitigate the spread of the virus. "Nothing more could have been done," Trump told Woodward.
But the president's early response to the pandemic has been widely criticized, with many experts saying the US wasted time in expanding testing and contact tracing resources. 
Trump himself also admitted to Woodward in March that he had worked to downplay the seriousness of the virus.
Overall, the president spoke to Woodward 19 times for his book, representing a total of nearly 10 hours of conversation.
enltrList of Woodward's interviews with Trump and their duration. pic.twitter.com/xkRL5Be1T0
 - Kaitlan Collins (@kaitlancollins) September 14, 2020
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.23pm BST
block-time published-time 4.58pm BST 
Vice President Mike Pence  is about to speak to a few hundred supporters in a conference room in Janesville, Wisconsin.
enltrVice President Pence is holding a campaign rally inside in a conference room at a Janesville Holiday Inn. Most attendees are spaced a few feet apart and aren't wearing masks as we await the VP's remarks. pic.twitter.com/5EIylgY10J
 - Brett Samuels (@Brett_Samuels27) September 14, 2020
Attendees' chairs were spaced a few feet apart, but most people there were not wearing masks as they awaited the vice president's arrival.
The event comes one day after Trump  addressed thousands of supporters at an indoor rally in Henderson, Nevada, attracting criticism from Democratic officials in the state.
Nevada's Democratic governor, Steve Sisolak,  said in a statement, "The President appears to have forgotten that this country is still in the middle of a global pandemic." 
block-time published-time 4.44pm BST 
 Vice President Mike Pence has arrived in the crucial swing state of Wisconsin,  which Trump  won by less than 1 point in 2016.
The vice president will hold a campaign rally in Janesville, Wisconsin, and another in Bozeman, Montana, later today.
enltrA masked @VP Pence lands in Janesville, WI for a campaign rally. From here, he goes to Belgrade for a Montana GOP rally this afternoon. Plans for a reported appearance at a fundraiser hosted by QAnon backers changed & a Pence spokesman says it was never on the official schedule. pic.twitter.com/nUpjbeuPae
 - Monica Alba (@albamonica) September 14, 2020
 Joe Biden 's deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield,  released a statement denouncing Pence's visit to Wisconsin.
" President Trump admitted he intentionally downplayed the virus and misled the American people, and Wisconsin continues to pay the price -- in lost jobs, lost businesses, and lost lives," Bedingfield said.
block-time published-time 4.22pm BST 
After House speaker Nancy Pelosi  acknowledged she has not spoken to Trump  about the wildfires, MSNBC anchor Craig Melvin  asked this: have you and the president stopped talking entirely?
"Well, I've spoken to his representatives," Pelosi said, noting Trump has indicated his advisers represent him in the negotiations over the next coronavirus relief package, which remain stalled.
Reports suggest the president and the Democratic speaker have not spoken since last October, as the House impeachment inquiry was intensifying.
So as the country faces a global pandemic, a national reckoning over racism and devastating wildfires, the president and the speaker of the House are simply not communicating.
block-time published-time 4.14pm BST 
 House speaker Nancy Pelosi said she has not spoken to Trump about the wildfires,  which are ravaging her home state of California.
Pelosi said she had no complaints about the federal assistance her state has received to help combat the fires, but the Democratic speaker criticized Trump for ignoring the devastating effects of climate change.
"it's really quite sad," Pelosi said of Trump's approach to climate change.
The speaker also denounced the president for holding an "anti-science rally" in Nevada over the weekend.
block-time published-time 4.00pm BST 
 Very few people wore masks at Trump's large indoor rally in Henderson, Nevada, yesterday  -- with one glaring exception.
The AP has the details :
 Eager to project a sense of normalcy in imagery, Trump soaked up the raucous cheers inside a warehouse. Relatively few in the crowd wore masks, with one clear exception: Those in the stands directly behind Trump, whose images would end up on TV, were mandated to wear face coverings. 
The president spent months refusing to issue a recommendation to wear face masks, despite mounting evidence that they help limit the spread of coronavirus.
Trump finally did urge Americans to wear masks in July, describing the use of masks as an act of patriotism. However, the president has consistently been seen not wearing a mask in public since he issued that recommendation.
block-time published-time 3.38pm BST 
In his first interview since serving as a star witness in Trump 's impeachment trial, Alexander Vindman said he considered the US president to be a "useful idiot" for Vladimir Putin. 
The Atlantic's Jeffrey Goldberg asked Vindman, a former official on Trump's National Security Council, if he thought Trump was a Russian intelligence asset.
Vindman replied, "President Trump should be considered to be a useful idiot and a fellow traveler, which makes him an unwitting agent of Putin." By "fellow traveler," Vindman said he meant both Trump and Putin oppose many democratic norms.
"They may or may not have dirt on him, but they don't have to use it," Vindman said, when asked if he thought Trump was being blackmailed by Putin. 
"They have more effective and less risky ways to employ him. He has aspirations to be the kind of leader that Putin is, and so he admires him. He likes authoritarian strongmen who act with impunity, without checks and balances. So he'll try to please Putin."
Vindman went on to say, "In the Army we call this 'free chicken,' something you don't have to work for-it just comes to you. This is what the Russians have in Trump: free chicken."
Read the full Atlantic story here: " Alexander Vindman: Trump Is Putin's 'Useful Idiot.' " 
block-time published-time 3.13pm BST 
 Trump dismisses concerns about coronavirus spread at Nevada rally  
 Trump  dismissed concerns about the possible spread of coronavirus at his indoor rally in Henderson, Nevada, this weekend.
"I'm on a stage and it's very far away," the president told the Las Vegas Review-Journal. "And so I'm not at all concerned."
Of course, that comment does not address the potential threat posed to the thousands of his supporters who attended the rally.
"I'm more concerned about how close you are, to be honest," Trump told the Review-Journal reporter, who said she was socially distanced from the president.
Trump said he did not believe he was subject to an order from Nevada's Democratic governor, Steve Sisolak,  mandating that gatherings be limited to 50 people.
The president attacked Sisolak as "a political hack" who was trying to control the November elections in his state, even though the Nevada secretary of state is a Republican. 
"The governor totally controls it," Trump said. "That's okay, he wants to play the game, we'll play the game." (Recent polls show the president trailing by several points in Nevada, which Hillary Clinton  won in 2016.)
Sisolak said in a statement, "Tonight, President Donald Trump is taking reckless and selfish actions that are putting countless lives in danger here in Nevada.... The President appears to have forgotten that this country is still in the middle of a global pandemic."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23pm BST
block-time published-time 3.00pm BST 
 Bob Woodward continued his publicity tour on Monday, speaking to NBC's Today, again defending his decision to save tapes of Trump  admitting to playing down the coronavirus threat for his new book, which arrives with more than 190,000 dead in the US.
Regarding foreign policy, NBC played a hitherto unheard tape of Trump discussing his relationships with autocratic and repressive world leaders.
"I get on very well with Erdogan," Trump said, referring to the president of Turkey. "Everyone says 'what a horrible guy' but for me it works out. It's funny, the relationships I have, the tougher and meaner they are, the better I get along with them. Explain that to me someday, OK, but maybe it's not a bad thing.
"The easy ones are maybe the ones I don't like as much or don't get along with as much."
Woodward said "the president just controls foreign relations unilaterally. And he has decided, 'Oh, I'm gonna get along with Putin, I'm gonna get a long with the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, MBS. I'm gonna try to get along with Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, but not South Korea and he just smears South Korea, time and time again in my interviews."
 Related:  Woodward: Trump raged when told Israel-UAE deal wouldn't make book
block-time published-time 2.43pm BST 
This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam.
 Trump  will receive a briefing on the wildfires in the California later today, but the president is currently busy tweeting his complaints about the November election.
Trump, who is still in Nevada after this weekend's campaign events there, has already sent roughly 50 tweets this morning.
enltrHis handlers and the Fake News Media are doing everything possible to get him through the Election. Then he will resign, or whatever, and we are stuck with a super liberal wack job that NOBODY wanted! https://t.co/eHhy0yBx9o
 - Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 14, 2020
In one of them, Trump echoed accusations from his campaign that Joe Biden  is using a teleprompter during interviews and said, "His handlers and the Fake News Media are doing everything possible to get him through the Election. Then he will resign, or whatever, and we are stuck with a super liberal wack job that NOBODY wanted!" 
That last insult appears to be directed toward vice presidential nominee Kamala Harris.  An  NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released last month showed Harris was the only person on a major party's presidential ticket this year with a positive approval rating.
block-time published-time 2.10pm BST 
Speaking of that coronavirus relief plan - or lack of it - Margaret Somers as written for us this morning, asking how is such unnecessary suffering justified?
The 31 million Americans struggling with unemployment today are not a whit less desperate and fearful now that Mitch McConnell's "skinny" Covid-19 relief bill failed to pass the US Senate. Thursday's performative theatrics did little more than provide cover to vulnerable Republicans and add one more day to the now six weeks since Senate Republicans refused to extend the extra $600 in Covid-related weekly jobless benefits. With McConnell sounding all but liberated from any more pressure to show compassion before the election, and the media's attention pinned to shinier Trumpian objects, it is even more imperative to refocus on the crisis at hand and to dig beneath the hollow excuses for such demonstrable indifference on the part of lawmakers. It is time to find an answer to how is such unnecessary suffering justified?
According to the Republicans, the aid is "too generous" and "disincentivizes" the unemployed from seeking work. So perverse are the effects of these benefits, they argue, that it is actually workers gaming the system who are slowing the economic recovery, not the Covid-driven loss of millions of jobs. That these charges persist despite significant evidence to the contrary testifies to the power of the conservative creed that few things in life are more perilous than excess government compassion
Read it here:  Margaret Somers - Even the Republican 'skinny' relief bill failed. How is such unnecessary suffering justified?
 Related:  Even the Republican 'skinny' relief bill failed. How is such unnecessary suffering justified? | Margaret Somers
And that's your lot from me this morning, I'm handing over to Joan Greve in Washington. See you tomorrow.
block-time published-time 1.47pm BST 
Secretary of the treasury Steve Mnuchin has been on the airwaves this morning, making a fairly wide-ranging set of points.
enltrMnuchin, asked about the economic impact of President Trump playing down the virus: "The president made the very very difficult decision to close down the economy, I was there in the Oval Office, and it was a difficult decision but it was the correct decision."
- Eamon Javers (@EamonJavers) September 14, 2020
On the prospect of some kind of coronavirus relief bill still getting passed, he said there still could be a deal.
"I will continue to work on this. I've told the speaker I'm available anytime to negotiate, no conditions," he told CNBC in an interview, referring to US House speaker Nancy Pelosi. 
enltrMnuchin on @SpeakerPelosi : "I'm not going to speculate on whether we're going to get something or not. I think there is a compromise, if the speaker is willing to move forward. I am somewhat concerned that she's afraid that any deal will be good for the president."
- Quint Forgey (@QuintForgey) September 14, 2020
On the broader economic picture he said "Now is not the time to worry about shrinking the deficit or shrinking the Fed's balance sheet."
enltrMnuchin: "Now is not the time to worry about shrinking the deficit or shrinking the Fed's balance sheet."
- Eamon Javers (@EamonJavers) September 14, 2020
He also confirmed that the new deadline for the sale of TikTok is 20 September. Oracle has won the bidding to purchase the US operation of the video-sharing app fromChina-based ByteDance, beating out Microsoft to the deal. Mnuchin said that after a review by the Committee on Foreign Investment, a recommendation will be made to President Donald Trump. 
block-time published-time 1.37pm BST 
 New York Senator Kirsten Gillibrand has just posted a long thread on social media to announce that she is to attempt to introduce "sweeping legislation" to help veterans with diseases linked with exposures to burn pits and other toxins.
enltrTHREAD: I'm announcing sweeping legislation to help veterans with diseases linked with exposures to #burnpits and other toxins. Many vets are sick and dying from these exposures-and the VA has made it difficult for them to get care. It's an outrage. 1/8
- Kirsten Gillibrand (@SenGillibrand) September 14, 2020
She says that during military operations in the last two decades the military used open burn pits to dispose of garbage and other waste, causing servicemen to live and breathe in what she describes as "a toxic cocktail of dust, smoke, and debris". The practice is forbidden domestically.
enltrThe largest burn pit, on Balad Air Base in Iraq, was 10 acres of burning garbage, plastics, and medical waste. It burned 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, from 2003 to 2009-next to where our service members ate, slept, and worked. 4/8
- Kirsten Gillibrand (@SenGillibrand) September 14, 2020
She goes on to say "I led a hard fight to get our 9/11 heroes the care they needed. Like our 9/11 heroes, these veterans answered the call of duty-fighting wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and elsewhere-and were made sick by their service."
block-time published-time 1.31pm BST 
Maanvi Singh in Oakland has our latest on the west coast wildfires :
Nearly all the dozens of people reported missing after a devastating blaze in southern Oregon have been accounted for, authorities said as crews battled wildfires that have killed at least 35 from California to Washington state. 
The Democratic governors of all three states say the fires are a consequence of climate change, taking aim at Donald Trump ahead of his visit Monday to California for a briefing. Joe Biden planned to address the fires and the climate crisis during a speech in Wilmington, Delaware.
Flames up and down the west coast have destroyed neighborhoods, leaving charred rubble and burned-out cars, forcing tens of thousands to flee and casting a shroud of smoke that has given Seattle, San Francisco and Portland some of the worst air quality in the world.
The smoke filled the air and spread to nearby states. While making it difficult to breathe, it helped firefighters by blocking the sun and turning the weather cooler as they tried to get a handle on the blazes, which were slowing in some places.
But warnings of low moisture and strong winds that could fan the flames added urgency to the battle. The so-called red flag warnings stretched from hard-hit southern Oregon to northern California and extended through Monday evening.
Read it here: Nearly all missing people accounted for as at least 35 killed in fires in US west
block-time published-time 1.28pm BST 
As well as visiting California to meet Gov. Newsom and be briefed on the wildfires, president Donald Trump has a campaigning stop in Arizona today, seen as a must-win state for him. Reid Wilson at The Hill has a scene-setter for that visit, writing:
A new survey released Monday morning shows Trump in deep trouble in Arizona. The survey, conducted by Phoenix-based OH Predictive Insights, shows former Vice President Joe Biden leading Trump by a 52 percent to 42 percent margin.
It is the eighth consecutive public poll that has showed Biden leading in Arizona and Biden has led in 17 of the last 20 polls. A CBS News poll released Sunday showed Biden leading by a smaller three-point margin, 47 percent to 44 percent.
The latest poll underscores the foundations of Biden's lead over Trump, in both national and swing-state surveys: He is winning about the same percentage of voters as Hillary Clinton did in 2016 among groups that lean toward Democrats, but he is doing substantially better among groups that chose Trump over Clinton four years ago.
But Wilson also quotes the Trump campaign shrugging off the figures. "This is not a serious poll and it is not remotely accurate," said Tim Murtaugh, the campaign's communications chief.
Read it here:  The Hill - Trump pulls into must-win Arizona trailing in polls
block-time published-time 1.22pm BST 
Tom McCarthy has an analysis piece for us this morning setting out that it is just 50 days until a US election that both sides see as an existential struggle.
If Biden can win in Florida, most analysts believe, an electoral college victory is probably his. But the added uncertainty of mail-in voting creates an extra opportunity for Trump to sow chaos, his critics believe, envisioning scenarios in which Trump declares premature victory or denies the election result outright.
The Biden campaign announced in July that it had hired an army of 600 lawyers to fight any election night "chicanery" by Republicans.
The Trump campaign has struggled to respond, in part because it is running low on money. Last week it was revealed that after raising nearly $1bn, the campaign had spent most of it, apparently dumping hundreds of millions of dollars last spring into online searches for potential future donors. In multiple swing states, the Biden campaign is outspending the Trump side by millions on influential TV ad spots.
Read it here:  Just 50 days until a US election both sides see as an existential struggle
 Related:  Just 50 days until a US election both sides see as an existential struggle
block-time published-time 1.04pm BST 
Fox News are touting as an exclusive this morning that the White House is to host a 'Made in America' event next month to show off American-made products. It would be the fourth such event of the Trump presidency and is expected to be held on 5 October. Brooke Singman writes:
A White House official told Fox News that Lockheed Martin, based in Maryland, which participated in the event last year, will feature its products during this year's showcase as well, while companies from 49 other states will be first-time participants.
"Over the past four years, President Trump has taken unprecedented action to empower American workers, bring manufacturing jobs back to the country, increase the production of domestic-made goods, and energize the American economy," White House spokesman Judd Deere told Fox News.
"The president looks forward to hosting incredible companies and their American-made products representing all 50 United States at the White House next month for what has become an annual event," Deere added.
Read it here: Fox News - White House to host 'Made in America' event as Trump, Biden battle for 'buy American' mantle
block-time published-time 12.56pm BST 
NBC's Today show has been making a lot this morning of having Bob Woodward on to promote sales of his book Rage. Host Savannah Guthrie pushed the journalism veteran again on why he did not publish his information about what Donald Trump had said about the coronavirus. He's stuck to his line that in February he thought Trump was talking about China, and that by the time there were a significant number of cases in the US, everybody knew that it was airborne and dangerous. He says:
In May, three months later, I learned the key piece of evidence that on 28 January, 10 days before that February call, the President was warned by his national security adviser in a top secret meeting that the virus is going to be the greatest national security threat to your presidency, and then his deputy Matthew Pottinger stepped up with details, explaining that the pandemic was coming.
This still, of course, doesn't explain why Woodward didn't make it public until a few days ago, if he had found that out in May. And as Guthrie points out in her questioning, regardless of the sourcing of Trump's information or the timing of when Woodward found out about it:
He tells you on 7 February, this is five times worse than the flu, is deadly, and it's airborne. And in the weeks following he was saying things like 'this is just a flu, it will just disappear', so you knew right then and there there was a contradiction between the public statement, and what he had told you.
You can watch the clip here:
enltrWhy didn't you publish this information until now? - @SavannahGuthrie asks @realBobWoodward about his book that reveals President Trump downplayed the coronavirus to the American public. pic.twitter.com/udYPnonSd7
 - TODAY (@TODAYshow) September 14, 2020
And refresh your memory of what the book says here:  Five key revelations in Bob Woodward's Trump book, from Covid to Kim 'love letters'
 Related:  Five key revelations in Bob Woodward's Trump book, from Covid to Kim 'love letters'
There's a bit more from the interview here as well:
enltr"The microphone is also a microscope." - @realBobWoodward on the audio recordings of his interviews with President Trump. Woodward tells @SavannahGuthrie he will release the audio tapes that are "relevant." pic.twitter.com/ypr43viXdQ
 - TODAY (@TODAYshow) September 14, 2020
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.58pm BST
block-time published-time 12.17pm BST 
There's 50 days to go until the US election, and some mornings I wake up in a cold sweat imagining that I'll be live blogging the results coming in for at least fifty days afterwards, such is likely to be the complexity and the dispute over the results of an election that the current president has already described as "rigged".
Shane Goldmacher reports for the New York Times this morning on how Joe Biden is creating a legal war room team, such is the expectation that there will be a lot of court battles before the result is decided. He writes:
Legal battles are already raging over how people will vote - and how ballots will be counted - this fall during the pandemic, and senior Biden officials described the ramp-up as necessary to guard the integrity of a fall election already clouded by President Trump's baseless accusations of widespread fraud.
The new operation will be overseen by Dana Remus, who has served as Biden's general counsel on the 2020 campaign, and Bob Bauer, a former White House counsel during the Obama administration who joined the Biden campaign full-time over the summer as a senior adviser.
Remus and Bauer outlined a multipronged program that will include some elements common to past presidential campaigns, such as fighting off voter suppression and ensuring people understood how to vote, and some more unique to 2020, such as administering an election during a pandemic and guarding against foreign interference.
As Goldmacher notes, the process of voting is especially complicated because of the coronavirus exanding the ability to vote by mail, all the time while the president has "repeatedly and falsely accused that process of being riddled with fraud, even as he himself has voted by mail in the past".
You can read it here: New York Times - Biden creates legal war room, preparing for a big fight over voting
block-time published-time 12.06pm BST 
Daniel Strauss in Washington has an analysis piece for us this morning, looking at how Joe Biden aims to make the election about Covid-19 as much as possible. He writes: 
The president and his aides have been more eager to focus on the economy, their attacks on Biden, foreign policy announcements, dark warnings of civil unrest and false predictions of a coming socialism should Biden win.
To a degree, the varying levels of eagerness to talk about coronavirus is understandable for both campaigns. Polling has shown voters broadly view Biden as the better candidate to handle the coronavirus pandemic while voters think the economy is in safer hands with Trump.
"The president has done a very bad job in this. There is no metric on which the president can actually claim he's done a good job on Covid," said Dr Zeke Emanuel, who served as a special adviser for health policy at the Office of Management and Budget for the Obama administration. "We haven't done a good job on testing, on ventilators, on PPE, on access to Remdesivir. Nothing. He hasn't prepared the country for a vaccine."
Read it here:  Biden aims to make election about Covid-19 as Trump steers focus elsewhere
 Related:  Biden aims to make election about Covid-19 as Trump steers focus elsewhere
block-time published-time 12.04pm BST 
Last night Michigan's lieutenant governor blasted Trump over his handling of the coronavirus pandemic in the US - directly calling him a liar.
 Lt. Gov. Garlin Gilchrist II said: "Donald Trump is a liar who has killed people, straight up. We cannot afford another four years of this man at the helm. There are literally millions of lives at stake."
He was speaking at a virtual event for progressive voters called "Fighting for Justice in Michigan". Michigan will be one of the key battlegrounds in November's US election. The state has had at least 123,075 cases and 6,912 deaths from coronavirus, and is currently averaging around 800 new cases a week.
block-time published-time 11.59am BST 
 Police use tear gas on protesters in Lancaster, Pennsylvania following fatal police shooting of Ricardo Munoz  
Associated press are reporting that police deployed tear gas on a crowd of people protesting earlier this morning after an officer shot and killed a man in Pennsylvania while responding to a domestic disturbance call.
Hundreds of protesters took to the streets of Lancaster following the shooting death of Ricardo Munoz, 27, on Sunday afternoon. The crowd formed outside the police station, where the department stated multiple buildings and government vehicles were damaged by demonstrators. 
Munoz was fatally shot after coming out of a home and chasing the officer with a knife, police said. Body camera video showed the officer fire several shots at Munoz, who then falls to the ground. The officer was placed on administrative leave. 
The Lancaster County District Attorney's Office was leading the investigation. District Attorney Heather Adams acknowledged the protests in a news release late Sunday and called for calm. 
"We ask that acts of protest remain peaceful as violence and destruction of property will become headlines and serve no purpose for the safety and wellbeing of our citizens and neighborhoods," Adams stated. 
As for the use of "chemical munitions" against protesters early Monday, the police department said in a statement that the crowd was given several warnings to disperse before the gas was deployed. 
The crowd "failed to follow the instructions," police stated, adding that items including glass bottles, gallon jugs filled with liquid, parts of plastic road barricades and more had been thrown at officers.
block-time published-time 11.49am BST 
 Donald Trump has tweeted this morning accusing the Joe Biden campaign of lying in a campaign ad. 
Quoting conservative media personality Lori Hendry, Trump added "Biden Handlers know this is a lie!" to her tweet about the advert on Trump's social security plans.
enltrBiden Handlers know this is a lie! https://t.co/QKLEkpb2ig
 - Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 14, 2020
On 4 September the Washington Post fact-checked the advert, and rated it as untrue, saying:
Democrats ginned up a letter from the chief actuary to describe a plan that does not currently exist. Trump certainly suggested he might eliminate the payroll tax, but then he pulled back from that idea and reiterated that any diversion for a payroll tax holiday would come out of general funds. 
The Washington Post's fact-checkers have, so far during the Trump administration, counted 20,055 false or misleading claims made by the president. 
block-time published-time 11.44am BST 
The CBS News Asia correspondent Ramy Inocencio has suggested that the first China heard about the departure of US Ambassador Terry Branstad from Beijing was when they saw secretary of state Mike Pompeo's tweets earlier. You imagine that might not go down terribly well at a time when relations are already strained. 
enltrIt's out. Official statement from U.S. embassy in Beijing on departure of Ambassador Terry Branstad. Heads home to Iowa in early October. Beijing says was not notified until MOFA saw @SecPompeo 's tweets earlier today. @CBSNews is here. ???????? @USA_China_Talkpic.twitter.com/INIV5V4sMZ
 - Ramy Inocencio ??? (@RamyInocencio) September 14, 2020
block-time published-time 11.38am BST 
Jason Wilson has been in Portland for us, reporting on how social media disinformation about the US west coast blazes appears to be spreading faster than the fire itself. He writes:
Photojournalist Nathan Howard was on assignment for a picture agency south-east of the fire-menaced foothill town of Estacada, Oregon, on Thursday afternoon when a man angrily approached him on a rural roadside.
The man insisted the photographer was a looter, Howard said, and despite his repeated attempts to identify himself as a journalist, the man began yelling and became so agitated that "it was like his eyes were popping out of his head". The man eventually allowed Howard to get in his car and leave, but gave chase as Howard drove north.
Then a second truck approached from the opposite direction, Howard said, and parked horizontally across the highway, blocking both lanes. A man climbed from the truck and pointed a loaded assault rifle at Howard through his car's windshield, and again accused him of looting, his finger on the trigger.
Wilson reports that this is just one of the real life consequences of the wave of disinformation on social media about the cause of the wildfires. Many rumors baselessly claim that the fires were lit by political activists, either the far-right group the Proud Boys or the leftist activists known as antifa.
You can read his full, and somewhat worrying, report here:  Social media disinformation on US west coast blazes 'spreading faster than fire'
 Related:  Social media disinformation on US west coast blazes 'spreading faster than fire'
block-time published-time 11.30am BST 
 US ambassador to China Terry Branstad to retire  
 The US ambassador to China is leaving his post, the embassy has confirmed. Terry Branstad will retire and leave Beijing early next month. The 73 years old former governor of Iowa leaves at a time when relations are strained, notably over bilateral trade, allegations about information security, and the coronavirus pandemic.
Earlier, before the move was confirmed, secretary of state Mike Pompeo thanked Ambassador Branstad on Twitter  for his more than three years of service.
"Ambassador Branstad has contributed to rebalancing US-China relations so that it is results-oriented, reciprocal, and fair", Pompeo wrote.
enltrI thank Ambassador Terry Branstad for his more than three years of service to the American people as U.S. Ambassador to the People's Republic of China.
- Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) September 14, 2020
enltrAmbassador Branstad has contributed to rebalancing U.S.-China relations so that it is results-oriented, reciprocal, and fair. This will have lasting, positive effects on U.S. foreign policy in the Asia-Pacific for decades to come.
- Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) September 14, 2020
Branstad was embroiled in a recent controversy when China's official People's Daily newspaper rejected an opinion column that he had submitted. It wasn't clear if his apparent departure was related to the piece. 
Pompeo tweeted last week that China's ruling Communist Part refused to run Branstad's op-ed while the Chinese ambassador to the United States is free to publish in any US media outlet. 
Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian responded that Branstad's article was full of loopholes, seriously inconsistent with facts and wantonly attacks and smears China. 
The US Embassy had contacted the People's Daily asking that it be printed in full without any edits by 4 September.
The Chinese foreign ministry has in the past described Branstad as an "old friend of the Chinese people". He first forged ties with President Xi Jinping several decades ago when Xi visited Iowa.
block-time published-time 11.25am BST 
The other coast of the US has also got natural disaster worries, with the prospect of more storms. Forecasters from the National Hurricane Center in Miami said Tropical Storm Sally is expected to become a hurricane on Monday and reach shore by early Tuesday, bringing dangerous weather conditions, including risk of flooding, to a region stretching from the western Florida Panhandle to southeast Louisiana.
Sally could produce rain totals up to 24 inches (61 centimeters) by the middle of the week, forecasters said. Its maximum sustained winds Monday morning were 60 mph (95 kph) report the Associated Press. 
"That system is forecast to bring not only damaging winds but a dangerous storm surge," said Daniel Brown of the Hurricane Center. "Because it's slowing down it could produce a tremendous amount of rainfall over the coming days."
This isn't the only storm in the Atlantic basin. Paulette gained hurricane status late Saturday and was expected to bring storm surge, coastal flooding and high winds to Bermuda, according to a US National Hurricane Center advisory. Tropical Depression Twenty strengthened into Tropical Storm Teddy on this morning, and was expected to become a hurricane later in the week, forecasters said. 
A mandatory evacuation has already been issued in Grand Isle, Louisiana, ahead of Sally. On Saturday, New Orleans Mayor LaToya Cantrell issued a mandatory evacuation order for Orleans Parish residents living outside of the parish's levee protection system. All northern Gulf Coast states are urging residents to prepare.
"It is likely that this storm system will be impacting Alabama's Gulf coast. While it is currently not being predicted as a direct hit to our coastal areas, we know well that we should not take the threat lightly," said Alabama Gov. Kay Ivey. She urged residents to prepare and stay informed of the storm's path in the coming days. 
block-time published-time 11.19am BST 
It's very easy to fall into the trap of viewing everything through the prism of partisan politics, but that does appear to be happening with the west coast wildfires at the moment. 
Lindsay Whitehurst and Sara Cline have written for the Associated Press about the conflict between Donald Trump and local Democratic party politicians.
Numerous studies in recent years have linked bigger wildfires in the US to global warming from the burning of coal, oil and gas. Democratic governors say the historic wildfires in California, Oregon and Washington state are a consequence of climate change, while the Trump administration has blamed poor forest management. 
    A helicopter makes drops water over the Bobcat fire, burning in the Angeles National Forest, near Arcadia, California. Photograph: Étienne Laurent/EPA   
Trump is headed to McClellan Park today, a former air base just outside Sacramento, California, and California Gov. Gavin Newsom 's office said he would be meeting with Trump. 
The governors have been blunt: Washington Gov. Jay Inslee on Sunday called climate change "a blowtorch over our states in the West. It is maddening right now that when we have this cosmic challenge to our communities, with the entire west coast of the United States on fire, to have a president to deny that these are not just wildfires, these are climate fires," Washington Gov. Jay Inslee said Sunday on ABC's This Week.
As Newsom toured a ghostlike landscape destroyed by flames Friday, he had called out the "ideological BS" of those who deny the danger. "The debate is over around climate change. Just come to the state of California, observe it with your own eyes," he said. 
    Firefighters work to extinguish the Bobcat Fire after an evacuation was ordered for the residents of Arcadia, in California. Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters   
 Oregon Gov. Kate Brown has said that about 500,000 acres typically burn each year, but just in the past week, flames have swallowed over a million acres, pointing to long-term drought and recent wild weather swings in the state. 
"This is truly the bellwether for climate change on the West Coast," she said Sunday on CBS' Face the Nation. "And this is a wake-up call for all of us that we have got to do everything in our power to tackle climate change." 
At a rally in Nevada, Trump blamed the way states have run the land, saying "it is about forest management." White House adviser Peter Navarro echoed that Sunday on CNN's State of the Union, saying that for many years in California, "particularly because of budget cutbacks, there was no inclination to manage our forests."
Millions of dollars are spent on forest management every year in Western states. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti accused Trump of perpetuating a lie that only forest management can curtail the massive fires seen in recent years. He pointed to drought and the need to reduce carbon emissions.
"Talk to a firefighter, if you think that climate change isn't real," the Democratic mayor said on CNN's State of the Union.
Warnings of low moisture and strong winds could fan the flames in hard-hit southern Oregon to Northern California and last through Tuesday.
block-time published-time 11.00am BST 
Good morning, welcome to our live coverage of US politics for Monday. Here's a quick catch-up on where we are, and a look forward to what we might expect later in the day.
    • Donald Trump's first indoor rally since June defied Covid laws. The Nevada event in front of a mostly mask-less crowd breached the state's 50-person limit and the Trump administration's coronavirus guidelines. He also boasted about getting the 'Bay of Pigs Award' - which doesn't exist.
    • 399 new coronavirus deaths and 33,369 new cases were reported in the US yesterday. Weekend numbers tend to be a little lower for admin reasons.
    • The death toll from wildfires choking the west coast of the US continued to rise.
    • The president will be in California this morning to get a briefing on the wildfires. He then heads to Phoenix, Arizona to take part in a Latinos for Trump Coalition Roundtable.
    • Secretary of state Mike Pompeo appears to have indicated this morning that US ambassador to China Terry Branstad is leaving his post.
    • There's been unrest in Lancaster, Pennsylvania leading to police using tear gas after protests over the fatal police shooting of Ricardo Munoz yesterday.
I'm Martin Belam, and I'll be with you for the next couple of hours. You can get in touch with me via martin.belam@theguardian.com

Load-Date: September 15, 2020


End of Document




Global climate march 2015: hundreds of thousands march around the world - as it happened; Thousands take to streets ahead of Paris climate summit Sydney to Seattle, via Hong Kong, Berlin, London and Sao Paulo, march on SundayClimate change protests take place across Australia Keep it in the ground: the Guardian's climate change campaignInteractive: why we are joining the global climate march
The Guardian
December 1, 2015 Tuesday 9:47 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 14858 words
Byline: Claire Phipps in Sydney, Adam Vaughan in London and Oliver Milman in New York
Body


block-time published-time 9.43pm GMT 
 The day in climate change rallies  
As the last of the day's climate marches get underway in the western reaches of North America, we will wrap up our live coverage of what has been a record-breaking day in global activism ahead of the COP21 talks in Paris tomorrow.
More than 600,000 people have taken to the streets in 175 countries around the world to call for a strong deal in Paris that will see a swift transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy.
Melbourne and London led the way, with 60,000 people and 50,000 people, respectively, joining marches. Figures including Thom Yorke, Emma Thompson, Charlotte Church and Jeremy Corbyn attended the London gathering.
Pope Francis and Ban Ki-moon were among the people to donate 10,000 pairs of shoes to an installation in Paris to represent people who could not march because of orders imposed by authorities after the 13 November attacks.
Protests in Paris turned violent, with police arresting around 200 people after clashes with anti-capitalists and anarchists. Some activists allegedly hurled candles and bouquets from memorials to victims of the 13 November attacks. Organisers of the climate marches have condemned the violence.
Barack Obama boarded a flight to Paris, where he said he will reaffirm the US's support for France in the face of "barbaric attacks" as well as forge a deal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and avert the worst ravages of climate change.
Climate talks will go on until 11 December, amid optimism among negotiators that an effective agreement can be reached. Let's hope Paris can finish the year on a positive note. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.20pm GMT 
Climate events are now underway on the west coast, with people gathering in Los Angeles and Vancouver. 
There are tentative estimates of 25,000 people attending the climate march in Ottawa. Organisers expect more than 600,000 people worldwide have attended marches calling for fossil fuels to remain in the ground and for nations to shift to 100% renewable energy use.
May Boeve, executive director of organiser 350.org, said: "The scale and diversity of today's events are astounding. Worldwide people are ready for the end of fossil fuels and the dawn of renewables. World leaders can no longer ignore this urgent call for action as the climate crisis continues to unfold. It is time for them to stand on the right side of history."
enltrDrum circle warming up the crowds at #Vancouver#ClimateMarch by @VanArtGallerypic.twitter.com/SB85lyb8TX
 - Geordon Omand (@gwomand) November 29, 2015
enltrPeople gathering for the #ClimateMarch at LA city hall. Come on down now!!!! pic.twitter.com/9wrhYxu1Di
 - Daisy J Lin (@paradoxdaisy) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 9.04pm GMT 
The rather sedate gatherings taking place in the US and Canada are in contrast to the clashes between protestors and police seen in Paris earlier this week.
French newspaper La Figaro has reported that some activists hurled objects from the memorial to those killed in the 13 November attacks at police. Candles and bouquets were launched in the direction of police, the newspaper said.
Others responded, as "many people managed to form a human chain around the memorial to protect flowers and candles", La Figaro reported (in French).
350.org, one of the major organisers of the climate marches, said that the clashes had violated a "nonviolent pledge that every group involved in the climate coalition here in France has agreed to." It has distanced itself from violence but said it opposes any attempt to "unnecessarily clamp down on civil liberties."
The official climate march in Paris was banned due to security concerns. Around 200 people were arrested during the subsequent clashes, with police using tear gas to disperse protestors. 
block-time published-time 7.58pm GMT 
Climate activists in the US and Canada haven't been able to muster the kinds of numbers seen at marches in Europe and Australia (in particular), nor is there the celebrity impact of, say, Radiohead's Thom Yorke DJ-ing for the crowd, as happened in London earlier. 
But hundreds of people have shown their support for a shift to renewables across North America, including the White House, New York and the Texas capitol building in Austin. 
enltr #HappeningNow#ClimateMarch in front of White House! pic.twitter.com/j9hKd02aca
 - Lee Camp [Redacted] (@LeeCamp) November 29, 2015
undltr #ClimateMarch#NYCpic.twitter.com/WJMqHoP5NG
 - Alex Zucker (@Alex_Zucker) November 29, 2015
enltrjessakwest: At #Austin 's #ClimateMarch for #COP21Paris ?? what an amazing #community -focused event. pic.twitter.com/b7pvagl0aj
 - Stacy Markham (@AustinpalStacy) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 7.20pm GMT 
Ottawa and Vancouver will vie for the largest turnout of climate marchers in Canada. Several thousand people have gathered in Ottawa to hear environmentalist David Suzuki demand the "necessity" of a fully renewable energy system. 
Prior to the march, Suzuki said he was glad to see the back of Stephen Harper, the pro fossil fuels former prime minister who was defeated earlier this month by Justin Trudeau and his Liberal party. 
"We've had nine-and-a-half years of a Harper government that has basically not confronted the issue of climate change," Suzuki said. "I believe that it is wilful blindness."
enltrAnd we're off! #100possible#ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/9capHE8jBO
 - Greenpeace Canada (@GreenpeaceCA) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.57pm GMT 
Back in New York, a series of speakers have called for a greater effort to move towards 100% renewable energy. Among them is Bill Nye, aka the science guy.
enltr"We can change the world!" - @BillNye the Science Guy before the #ClimateMarch in #NYC#ClimateForChange#COP21pic.twitter.com/kz8YaKK5bo
 - Stephanie Colombini (@Steph_Colombini) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.33pm GMT 
Organisers have announced that early estimates show the global climate marches are the largest ever held, with a likely total of more than 600,000 people. 
Around 570,000 people have already marched in 2,300 events in 175 countries around the world. Further marches in Vancouver, Ottawa and Mexico City are anticipated to push this number over 600,000, more than double the record set in last year's series of marches.
All this was achieved despite the largest march, in Paris, called off due to security concerns. Instead, thousands of shoes were laid out to symbolise the missing protesters.
According to organisers Avaaz, the largest marches took place in Melbourne (60,000 people) and London (50,000 people). 
Singer and activist Charlotte Church was one of those to attend the London march. She spoke to my colleague James Randerson about why she turned up - you can listen to their conversation here. 
block-time published-time 6.14pm GMT 
Climate marches have started in Chicago, where participants were asked to paint the world on their faces, and Ottawa. Climate activists in Canada and the US were recently buoyed by Barack Obama's blocking of the controversial Keystone pipeline project.
enltrFirst Nations youth kicking off Ottawa #climatemarch Indigenous in the lead all over! h/t @MikeHudemapic.twitter.com/rXqvkByjii
 - Bill McKibben (@billmckibben) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.04pm GMT 
There will be no repeat of the enormous climate march that took place in New York in September last year. That gathering of more than 400,000 people featured plenty of stardust - UN secretary general Ban Ki Moon, former US vice president Al Gore, New York City mayor Bill de Blasio and actors Mark Ruffalo and Leonardo DiCaprio were among the hordes.
Thanksgiving, which happened on Thursday, has somewhat clipped the wings of organisers in the US. There will, however, be events across the country. In New York, de Blasio will be the target, rather than participant, of a protest, with activists marching around City Hall at 2pm to demand greater investment in renewable energy and full divestment from fossil fuels. 
block-time published-time 5.55pm GMT 
Obama's comments on the Paris talks, posted on Facebook two hours ago, unsurprisingly laments the recent attacks in the French city before delving into the purpose of his trip: 
I'm heading to Paris today to join nearly 200 countries for a global conference on climate change. It's an opportunity to stand in solidarity with our oldest ally, just two weeks removed from the barbaric attacks there, and reaffirm our commitment to protect our people and our way of life from terrorist threats. It's also an opportunity for the world to stand as one and show that we will not be deterred from building a better future for our children.
What makes this gathering different is that more than 180 nations have already submitted plans to reduce the harmful emissions that help cause climate change. And America's leadership is helping to drive this progress. In fact, our businesses and workers have shown that it's possible to make progress towards a low-carbon future while creating new jobs and growing the economy. Our economic output is at all-time highs, but our greenhouse gas emissions are down towards 20-year lows.
So what we're trying to do in Paris is put in place a long-term framework for further emissions reductions - targets set by each nation, but transparent enough to be verified by other nations. And we'll work to mobilize support to help the most vulnerable countries expand clean energy and adapt to the effects of climate change we can no longer avoid.
I'm optimistic about what we can achieve - because I've already seen America take incredible strides these past seven years. And with that - I'll see you in Paris.
block-time published-time 5.44pm GMT 
Hello from a crisp New York afternoon as events to mark the start of the Paris climate talks start to unfold in the US and Canada.
US president Barack Obama won't be in the country to see any of them as he is enroute to Paris for the start of COP21. Obama will attend a series of meetings, opening with Xi Jinping, president of China. The White House hopes the meeting of the leaders of the two largest emitters of greenhouse gases will provide a helpful early shove to proceedings, helping avert the kinds of chaos seen at the Copenhagen talks in 2009.
Obama will also meet French president Francois Hollande, where the threat of terrorism is likely to be a topic of conversation as well as global warming. Afterwards, the US president is expected to sit down with leaders of low-lying island nations that are considered particularly vulnerable to climate change. 
Leaders of countries such as Kiribati and the Marshall Islands hope the Paris talks not only provide a firm commitment to capping global temperature increases to just 1.5C but also to ensure the delivery of $100 billion in climate finance to help adaptation. Some island leaders aren't too hopeful over any of this. 
block-time published-time 5.11pm GMT 
Summary
A record-breaking 50,000 people have marched in London. 20,000 people marched in Madrid and a similar number in Rome
Climate marches in Australia and New Zealand were the biggest ever
Pope Francis and Ban Ki-moon were among the people to donate 10,000 pairs of shoes to an installation in Paris to represent people who could not march because of orders imposed by authorities after the 13 November attacks
Protests in Paris turned violent when hundreds of anti-capitalists clashed with police there
Archbishop has warned world leaders of the consequences if they don't act at the Paris climate summit
I'm signing off for now but my colleague in New York, Oliver Milman, will shortly be taking over the live blog reins. Please keep sharing your photos of the marches via Guardian Witness.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.14pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.58pm GMT 
Here's a lighter video from London, of Charlotte Church singing: 
block-time published-time 4.54pm GMT 
 Green group distances itself from Paris clashes  
We've just posted some video of the protests turning ugly in Paris:
Environmental group 350.org has issued a statement distancing itself from the violent protests: 
 Starting around 2:30pm, a small group of protesters unaffiliated with the climate movement arrived at Republique and began to clash with the police there, violating the nonviolent pledge that every group involved in the climate coalition here in France has agreed to. Police responded with tear gas and pepper spray. The protest dispersed by around 3:45pm. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.45pm GMT 
Events on the other side of the Atlantic are underway. Here are a series of photos from Rio de Janeiro, by author Jules Boykoff:
enltrScenes from today's #ClimateMarch in #Rio de Janeiro (1/3) pic.twitter.com/vUxoz8qlhx
 - Jules Boykoff (@JulesBoykoff) November 29, 2015
enltrMore scenes from today's #ClimateMarch in #Rio de Janeiro, #Brazil (2/3) pic.twitter.com/hvDZrVgtwR
 - Jules Boykoff (@JulesBoykoff) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.37pm GMT 
 Protesters kettled in Paris by police  
I'm still stuck in a corner of the square [Place de la Republique] with about 400 protesters. The space is cramped. About 50mx50m. People are being pulled occasionally from the crowd and dragged into police vans. People here are angry and frustrated that the police have swept everyone up. Some of them are core anarchists. Others are people just caught up in the police clearing of the square. "It seems like they are taking us randomly and just waiting for some of us to turn violent," said one protester who initially wanted to march for the climate. Police are still sporadically hitting the most confrontational activists with tear gas. The protesters had a sound system that was pumping out heavy dance music for a while. But police moved in and arrested a bunch of those dancing. "We are imprisoned, call the police!" They are yelling. 
enltrEverybody now just waiting around. Thankfully someone brought a harmonica. Not really sure how this ends. pic.twitter.com/xp5M5b09I1
 - Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.33pm GMT 
Charlotte Church brought a choir from Wales to perform a song written for the march. She suggested people on the march should name it. "It' s an absolute priviledge and honour to march with you today. What we have done here today is stage the biggest climate march in UK history," she said. Here are the lyrics to the song: 
Way before I was born we knew we had learned we should be concerned or we're doomed
But chose to laugh in this face of an escapable fate...how brave
To pass on the buck to the unborn, how brave
Politics to one little fish means nothing but the opinion of all of us millions must count for something 
Despite facts irrefutable it's business as usual
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47am GMT
block-time published-time 4.21pm GMT 
Here's a great gallery of events around the world today, put together by my colleague Eric Hilaire: 
 Related:  Global climate march 2015 - in pictures
block-time published-time 4.19pm GMT 
 Tutu: if leaders don't take action they will be saying very clearly that they don't care  
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who has previously called for people to divest from fossil fuel companies, has issued a statement calling on world leaders in Paris to act on climate change before it's too late. Here's an excerpt:
It is an opportunity to address inequality; for powerful people and nations to acknowledge that their environmental wellbeing, their security and sustainability, is dependent on the wellbeing, security and sustainability of others. To acknowledge our inter-dependence, and the strengths and vulnerabilities we share.
If we "carry on as usual", there may not be another opportunity.
The days of not understanding the disastrous human and environmental consequences of rampant consumerism and greed are gone. Our leaders can no longer claim not to know. If they don't take action they will be saying very clearly that they don't care.
Should they grasp the opportunity, and develop a legally binding treaty to mitigate climate change, it will signal the end of the age of reckless consumption, exploitation and greed.
But failing to grasp the nettle will send a direct message of contempt to poorer nations and people, who cannot afford the costs of mitigating the impacts of increasing temperatures. It will trigger unprecedented economic and refugee crises, and dramatically deepen global insecurity.
It's a simple equation, really. Agree on mechanisms to enforce adherence to environmental justice, or consciously embrace injustice and add fuel to the fire of human division and pain.
We know that the only answer is to reduce carbon emissions, and the only way we can do that is by reducing our dependency on carbon fuels.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.20pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.53pm GMT 
I've been talking with actor and Greenpeace supporter Emma Thompson. "Unfortunately we live in a world which is absolutely in the pockets of fossil fuel companies," she said as we walked through London. Here are some brief clips of the interview:
enltrEmma Thompson on why she is marching at the #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/bhMZlg3rgh
 - Emma Howard (@EmmaEHoward) November 29, 2015
enltrI asked Emma Thompson: 'what do you hope for from Paris?' Here's her response from the #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/fPRAZMzskW
 - Emma Howard (@EmmaEHoward) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.45pm GMT 
 Record-breaking 50,000 people at London climate march  
Organisers are saying more than 50,000 people have turned out for a march in the UK capital. That's far more than attended the London 'Wave' march in 2009, before the Copenhagen climate summit, and the 27,000 at last year's London climate march.
Alex Wilks, campaign director at Avaaz, said: "This is the biggest climate march in British history with over 50,000 people marching today in London and thousands more in other cities across Britain. Our footsteps are echoing around the world alongside hundreds of thousands have taken to the streets calling for a transition to 100% clean energy."
A Met Police spokeswoman told me they would not be commenting on numbers on the march.
Campaign group Avaaz said 20,000 people had marched in Rome.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.39pm GMT 
Asad Rehman, a fixture at previous climate talks and Friends of the Earth's senior international climate campaigner, tells the London march: 
There is something deeply wrong with our world...the great injustice is that those who are least response for our crisis have to deal with its impacts. We live with a broken economic system that says that black lives don't matter, poor lives don't matter.... 
And it's people power that is going to defeat this climate crisis. We have the solutions but we just have politicians who lack the political will. 
block-time published-time 3.36pm GMT 
Here are a group of Sámi, an indigenous people in Sweden who say their way of life is threatened by climate change, singing on the stage in London. Footage by James Randerson.
block-time published-time 3.22pm GMT 
Speaking in London, Friends of the Earth's new CEO, Craig Bennett, says: 
This is a fantastic display of people power with thousands upon thousands taking to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change.
From Australia to Mozambique and the Philippines, as well as here in London, millions of our fellow citizens are urging our leaders to stand up to the global crisis of more floods, storms, droughts and rising seas.
We know the challenge we face, we know the solutions: now is the time to act.
block-time published-time 3.20pm GMT 
Meanwhile in London, marchers have reached parliament, where a second round of speeches is taking place. Here is the (slightly blurry) view from the stage: 
enltrView from the stage at the #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/796ZnlcED3
 - James Randerson (@james_randerson) November 29, 2015
enltrReaching Westminster #ClimateMarch#cop21pic.twitter.com/xXeBBFhOyK
 - Nabeelah (@lahnabee) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.49pm GMT 
I'm now stuck in a corner of the plaza surrounded by hundreds of police and a few hundred protesters who have been systematically pushed back. No one can get in or out. 
The day of action in Paris has completely disintegrated into a stand off between groups of anarchist protesters and riot police. The large crowd who showed up to campaign for a positive outcome at COP21 left long ago. 
Police moved into la place de la Republique and kettling those left. About 500 anarchists, including many from the "Black Bloc", are pelting police with glass bottles. Police responding with flash-bang bombs and tear gas. 
block-time published-time 2.37pm GMT 
 Tear gas in Paris  
An unauthorised demonstration at Place de la Republique degenerated into violence on Sunday afternoon. Hundreds of riot police sealed off the whole square and the roads around as clashes broke out with protestors. 
The protesters began by throwing missiles at police. There were several very large explosions, thought to be fireworks. Police began using tear gas to clear the area that has been a symbolic place of gathering since the Friday 13 November attacks in Paris. 
Police have now cleared the square. Still a helicopter overhead and sirens. Many of the flowers and candles left in tribute to the 130 people who died in the attacks have been trampled on and destroyed. 
enltrPolice using tear gas to clear Place de la Republique. pic.twitter.com/dbvP2NXNvB
 - Kim Willsher (@kimwillsher1) November 29, 2015
enltrPlace de la Republique. Two loud explosions. Not sure if tear gas or very big firecrackers. pic.twitter.com/VviY7BrjFw
 - Kim Willsher (@kimwillsher1) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.34pm GMT 
The Guardian's Nabeelah Shabbir is near the front of the London march, near musician Charlotte Church. Here are some of her photos of a 'die-in' over the impacts of climate change on the developing world. 
enltr'die-in' for global south. Police walked round reasoning with protectors #COP21@guardianeco#keepitinthegroundpic.twitter.com/ryVEULKmZz
 - Nabeelah (@lahnabee) November 29, 2015
enltrLondon climate march #COP21#thetimeisnowpic.twitter.com/PL6ZzvLM7P
 - Nabeelah (@lahnabee) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.21pm GMT 
Here's a short film from our video team of the marches, including the shoes in Paris. 
Paris climate protesters banned but 10,000 shoes remain
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.18pm GMT 
 20,000 protesters in Madrid  
Organisers are saying that around 20,000 people marched in the Spanish capital. 
esltr20.000 personas han pedido hoy en Madrid a líderes mundiales q salven el clima https://t.co/duG7M5Dx32#ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/r0G6u0m9HB
 - Greenpeace España (@greenpeace_esp) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.14pm GMT 
The future of the world may be decided inside a dozen or more vast, anonymous, rigid white structures on the edge of Paris. The convention centre at Le Bourget airport has been officially declared UN property for the duration of the meeting.
It boasts a mini Eiffel tower constructed of red chairs, the main street is lined with 30 or more plastic animals and the 195 countries' offices are empty and little is expected to happen until tomorrow morning. 
Meanwhile Paris city centre is almost empty of traffic and all public transport has been made free for two days to discourage cars and allow nearly 150 world leaders to whizz around unhindered between bilateral meetings in five star hotels and embassies. 
block-time published-time 2.11pm GMT 
And in the meantime, here some are some photos from James Randerson  and Emma Howard on marchers who are staying sunny despite the diabolical weather:
enltrDying for change at the #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/Xq9bBQ1YDj
 - James Randerson (@james_randerson) November 29, 2015
enltrTimes are tough in hell. Even the grim reaper is collecting pic.twitter.com/v3KvqRZPOi
 - James Randerson (@james_randerson) November 29, 2015
enltrSafety first at the #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/e4RDAhsgp5
 - James Randerson (@james_randerson) November 29, 2015
enltrSome beautifully painted placards out here in London today #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/Nm6P988t6D
 - Emma Howard (@EmmaEHoward) November 29, 2015
enltrDespite the wind and rain, people have come to the global #ClimateMarch in London in their thousands. pic.twitter.com/NLBhhTTMmg
 - Emma Howard (@EmmaEHoward) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.06pm GMT 
More soon from Paris, where Karl Mathiesen is among those caught up in the teargas used by police after people with an apparently anti-capatalist agenda clashed with police.
block-time published-time 2.04pm GMT 
From Geneva and Barcelona to Paris and Lyon, and Laikipia in Kenya, here are some of your march photos:
CAFOD supporters at the London march
Man in pic = mark Harrington and son zacharie
He says: "we're here because our family can't march in Paris and the impact of climate change will be more significant for our children and we want them to have a voice in that"
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By CAFODaidagency
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 13:29 
Showing Solidarity with Shoes
On the eve of the opening of COP21, demonstrators are gathered at Place de la Republique in Paris, leaving shoes as a symbol of solidarity with the nearly two million people expected to take part in a march today, but that was stopped for security reasons.
Photo: Sean Hawkey/WCC
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Carolyn Moncel
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 13:16 
Human Chain in Lyon, France 
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Barbelle
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:53 
Climate March at noon on the Equator in Nanyuki, Laikipia, Kenya
200 marchers at the Equator joined the Worldwide march
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By MaggieHobbs
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 13:05 
Young activists march for climate action in Makassar, Indonesia
29 November. This was the first ever climate march in Makassar, a coastal city in eastern Indonesia. Elementary school kids joined the march organised by Earth Hour Makassar and other community groups. Hand held signs represents domestic issues such as forest fires, coral bleaching and heavy reliance on coal.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Reiko Yamada
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:49 
the Greens
Getting undressed in winter to show the Earth is heating up a little more every year
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By ID220892
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:49 
block-time published-time 1.49pm GMT 
Caroline Lucas, Green party MP, told crowds in London: 
To change everything we need everyone. That's why people are gathering in cities around this country and the world. We are already so far ahead of the governments and the private corporations who block us....We already know that what's on offer in Paris is nowhere near enough.we know that business as usual will take us towards a world of 4C warming....that is a future of droughts desertification and disease. We refuse to leave our future in the hands of those inside the secure zone in a conference centre in Paris... We already know what needs to be done. We need a massive investment in renewable energy and efficiency to create hundreds of thousands of jobs...we need to be serious about agriculture because meat production creates more emissions than all the card and trains and planes out together. 
Special shout out to divestment campaign who with all their inspiration have showed us the way
David Cameron is taking a wreaking ball to environmental policy....We are here to say the fight against fracking and nuclear is only just beginning. 
block-time published-time 1.39pm GMT 
Here's some video of Corbyn's speech, via James Randerson. Apologies for it being split into four parts:
block-time published-time 1.29pm GMT 
 Corbyn: make world leaders act at Paris  
Corbyn, standing atop a fire engine in London next to shadow chancellor John McDonnell, tells his audience to send a message to the more than 147 world leaders expected to attend the Paris climate talks:
Those who are sitting around the tables in Paris have an enormous opportunity in front of them. Do not let them flake it or fool us. Make them understand that if we are to bequeath to future generations a world of flooding, a world of environmental disaster, a world where our children will not be able to live or eat properly, then they will do nothing and allow the pollution of this planet to continue. If however, they listen to the words of millions all around the world: it is possible to reduce the level of emissions, it is possible to slow the rate of temperature change, it is possible to protect large parts fo the environment of this planet, then they will have done something useful. Our message today is to them: do what you are sent there to do.
Videos to come shortly.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.22pm GMT 
Cecelia Anim, president of the Royal College of Nursing, tells me: 
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges we face. If it goes unchecked climate changewill be devastating for human health and will put a huge strain on our health system. Every healthcare professional has a duty to raise awareness of climate change. Health professionals must lead the way. 
 Related:  UK reversing and undoing climate change policies, say doctors and nurses
block-time published-time 1.14pm GMT 
 Anti-capitalists clash with police in Paris  
In Paris a group of socialist activists who have been circling La Place de la Republique have confronted police at one of the exits of the famous roundabout. Tear gas and batons are being used to push them back. 
It appears to be a high jacking of the climate march by those with another agenda. "It is more to against capitalism [than a call for climate action]," said one. 
Police just set off large bangs to deter the crowd. Which incensed them because of the resemblance to bombs. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.07pm GMT 
Fashion designer Vivienne Westwood is in London; she said:
It looks great. We are the people. Politicians are criminals. They are trapped in the rotten financial system which is the cause of poverty war and climate change....Politicians just talk about how they are going to deal with it....How are they going to deal with what will be absolute horror? These idiots accept it. We need to stop it! There is no choice between the green economy and mass extinction.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47am GMT
block-time published-time 12.57pm GMT 
All parties were invited to speak in London but the Conservative party did not provide anyone. Lynne Featherstone is here from the Liberal Democrats. "We never find enough words to convey the cataclysm ahead. Unless we mitigate and adapt, the world will be in the greatest trouble we have ever seen," she said. Caroline Lucas is there for the Greens and Corbyn for Labour.
block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT 
The wind is blowing hard, the rain is coming down but still the people have come to London in their thousands. People have travelled here from Wales, Scotland and fracking communities in Lancashire who are standing right at the front. One group from Brighton travelled here on a bus powered by chip fat, according to organisers. There are people from the Sápmi indigenous community in Sweden, where the melting arctic is having a big impact on their daily lives.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.38pm GMT 
 Tens of thousands at London march  
The Press Association is reporting that tens of thousands of people have gathered in central London for the march. I'll update you on numbers later, based on what organisers and police say.
block-time published-time 12.28pm GMT 
And here's Corbyn in London, where he's due to speak shortly ( see 12:03 ). Next to him is Lisa Nandy MP, shadow energy and climate change secretary.
enltrIt may be a wet and windy Sunday in London but Labour are out in force for today's #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/JaV4JLRTGl
 - Labour Energy (@labourenergy) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 12.24pm GMT 
Our reporter Karl Mathiesen is in Paris where the police are still out in numbers following the attacks just over a fortnight ago: 
enltrNo marching. But lots of police in Paris today. pic.twitter.com/Y20XbreqBR
 - Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
enltrInstead of marching the streets. About 200-300 Parisians are circling around the monument in Place de la republique.
- Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.22pm GMT 
The march in London is attracting some big crowds, colourful outfits and famous faces (I've seen at least one Instagrammed selfie with musician Peter Gabriel. Actor Emma Thompson and singer/activist Charlotte Church are also out there somewhere). Emma Howard is on the ground for the Guardian and will be reporting live throughout the day.
enltrLondon climate march is turning out well pic.twitter.com/ArhmNVG9Hj
 - Jacob Dixon (@Justabitofjacob) November 29, 2015
enltrRight at the front with the indigenous peoples, leading London's #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/7il4EN9bQT
 - James Tennent (@duckytennent) November 29, 2015
enltrA pack of polar bears beside Wellingon Arch in London for the #ClimateMarch. pic.twitter.com/qefRkS1st5
 - Claire Marshall (@BBCMarshall) November 29, 2015
enltrReady to march with the Suffolk Greens #cop21#ClimateMarch#Londonpic.twitter.com/2g1EJFfUM4
 - SuffolkCoastalGreens (@SuffCoastGreens) November 29, 2015
Even the BT tower is joining in:
enltrIn #London ? Share your pictures of the BT Tower which is supporting #go100percent renewable energy #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/hJt2d4cpGs
 - BT Better Future (@BTBetterFuture) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.03pm GMT 
 Addressing inequality essential for tackling climate change, Corbyn to say  
Here's an excerpt of what Corbyn is expected to say in around half an hour's time:
The greener world I know is possible is a more just, a more equal, and a more productive world
To tackle climate change, we must tackle global inequality, we must show that defeating the menace of global warming will not only improve the prospects of our children and grandchildren, but will improve lives here and now 
Britain should be at the forefront of that argument, leading global efforts to a political solution to climate change at the Paris conference. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.59am GMT 
People have marched across Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, in Yemen, Tanzania, Singapore, South Africa and Benin among many other countries.
Around 70 people reportedly turned up in Sanaa in Yemen, despite reported bombing by airplanes just a few miles away.
Walid Yehia Hassan Al-Hashef, an Avaaz member in Sanaa has written in to say: 
Airstrike targets crowds of people and today early morning an airstrike hit around 4km from our protest location. We expected 150 people because of the airstrike only around 70 people showed up.
Yes, I have a message to every human being on our planet... In Yemen we are peaceful people we do not have place in our behaviors or culture for terror. We in Yemen love all people christians, jews, muslims and others.
     Yemen climate change protest on 29 November 2015. Photograph: Avaaz     
undltr #UNVolunteers#actioncounts#MarcheClimat#COP21pic.twitter.com/KqFIX8O7Vq
 - UN Benin (@UNBenin) November 29, 2015Singapore sends its love to Paris as a Green Heart
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By autumnclean
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 9:43 
Marches are getting underway in Berlin and Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam is raring to go!! 
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By guardianUser11784703
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:51 
Climate Change March begins outside Berlin HBF
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Amy Newiss
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 11:17 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.45am GMT 
 Latvian president: deal in Paris 'quite close'  
 Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis, Europe's first Green party head of state, tells Reuters that because most countries have already submitted their climate plans, a deal in Paris in two weeks' time is close. 
"...We are quite close to... an accord and a new Kyoto agreement, which would be a Paris agreement, hopefully will be reached," he said in reference to the 1997 Kyoto protocol, the only previous legally-binding international climate treaty.
Vejonis also said he hoped all leaders would agree on a "legally-binding document" in Paris, apparently putting him at odds with the US, which has made clear it does not want a treaty.
block-time published-time 11.34am GMT 
In case you were wondering (like me) what was going to happen to all the shoes in Place de la Republique, Avaaz tells me that they are being given to a social enterprise called Relais 75 Emmaus that works with homeless people.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am GMT
block-time published-time 11.26am GMT 
 Maurice Strong has died  
Tributes have been paid to Maurice Strong, the first executive director at the UN environment programme (Unep), who has died aged 86. He was also the secretary general at the Stockholm environment meeting in 1972 and Rio Earth Summit in 1992, which paved the way for the Paris climate summit that people are marching for today.
    Maurice Strong. Photograph: David Karp/AP   
The current Unep chief, Achim Steiner, said: "Strong will forever be remembered for placing the environment on the international agenda and at the heart of development. He shepherd global environmental governance processes."
Steiner added that a strong deal at Paris would be a "fitting tribute" to Strong's legacy. We'll have more on this later from my colleague John Vidal, who knew Strong. 
enltrTeresa & I sad to hear of death of Rio Earth Summit organizer Maurice Strong. Our best tribute will be to advance climate agenda at #COP21.
- John Kerry (@JohnKerry) November 29, 2015
In his last interview with the Guardian, in 2010, Strong said of the state of the world's environment and the challenge of climate change:
Analytically, I'm pessimistic. I believe the odds are against us for making the changes we need to make in time. But, operationally, I'm optimistic because I believe that it is still possible. Tougher the longer we delay it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.18am GMT 
 Human chain in Paris  
The march that was expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people on the streets of Paris today may have been forbidden, but there are still plenty of people out calling for action on climate change in the French capital today. 
Tweets and live streams on Periscope show what appears to be hundreds of people forming a human chain in central Paris, holding placards calling for "climate justice" and to "keep it [fossil fuels] in the ground".
enltrMassive human chain in Paris for #climatejustice. No war, no warming. #COP21pic.twitter.com/Od9Osyg8sa
 - Amis de la Terre FR (@amisdelaterre) November 29, 2015
enltrTaiwan #climate youth part of thousands forming human chain in #paris#nofibs#peoplesclimate#COP21pic.twitter.com/l9uCU03MfF
 - John Englart EAM (@takvera) November 29, 2015
enltrA human chain "for peace and climate justice" Paris pic.twitter.com/g7Hw1O4A9Q
 - Antonia Juhasz (@AntoniaJuhasz) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 11.05am GMT 
 Pope Francis and UN secretary general donate shoes in Paris  
As well as the Pope, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has donated his shoes (a pair of new-looking running trainers), to the Paris shoe installation:
enltrBan Ki-moon donated his shoes to stand in solidarity w/ people of Paris unable to join a #climatemarch today. #COP21pic.twitter.com/38JGGTqvOj
 - United Nations (@UN) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 10.59am GMT 
Want to know what these marches are all about? If you can make it to London on Thursday, there's a Guardian Live event on the Paris climate summit with Australian Tim Flannery (former chief commissioner of the Climate Commission there), former UK climate diplomat John Ashton and Friends of the Earth CEO Craig Bennett. Find out more on the event listing.
Our climate talks expert, Fiona Harvey, has also written a guide on everything you need to know about the Paris summit. Or you can watch our 60-second video explainer:
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02am GMT
block-time published-time 10.45am GMT 
 Record numbers in Australia and New Zealand  
March organisers say there were at least 140,000 people marching in Australia and 33,000 in New Zealand, both of which they say are the highest ever turn-outs for climate marches in both countries. The Guardian is unable to independently verify the numbers.
block-time published-time 10.37am GMT 
Climate Home, part of the Guardian Environment Network, is in Paris this morning interviewing Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director at Avaaz, which has been heavily involved in organising the marches. You can watch the interview here:
   Emma Ruby-Sachs  
Of the shoes installation in Paris, she says:
It's kind of an incredible monument both to the voices that have been silenced but also to that hope for action that comes out of this city.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.29am GMT 
Remember, you can share your photos and videos of the marches via Guardian Witness (just click the blue button above on this blog). Here are some already submitted, from Australia to Dublin:
I marched for Laurie
Website MarchlMe matched marchers with those in Paris whose March was cancelled.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By jillfavero
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:35 
Paris - preparing for tomorrow's virtual march
Since the march has been cancelled by the French authorities in the wake of the atrocious attacks on November 13, an alternative has been found in which people can deposit shoes tomorrow morning in la place de la République, together with their messages to world leaders. The shoes will march for us in a virtual way.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By SarahMarder
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:50 
A little bit of artivism for the march tomorrow
Double-sided placard which I'm carrying at the march tomorrow, bigging up the 'keep it in the ground' campaign...
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By James Milroy
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:22 
The T-Shirts are in!
Getting ready for the Dublin Climate March on the 29th. The largest mobilisation Ireland will have ever seen!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By smartgreenliv
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 19:30 
block-time published-time 10.02am GMT 
 Corbyn to speak at London march  
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is among the public figures attending the London march later today, a spokeswoman has just confirmed to me. I'll update this post when I know exactly when and where along the march - there's a rally at 1pm at Millbank and speeches later at 2.45pm by parliament.
Corbyn's attendance looks like a last-minute decision, given his name wasn't on lists of speakers even two days ago. According to my colleague Robin McKie, he will attack the Conservative party's leadership on climate change, following a series of green policies being cancelled over the summer, saying "There are no more hugs for the husky, instead it's a passionate embrace for the carbon polluters." 
It's the first time I can think of a leading Labour politician speaking at a big climate march - the most high profile politician is usually Green party MP, Caroline Lucas.
Other speakers from 2.45pm include NUS vice-president, Piers Telemacque, and musician and activist Charlotte Church who is singing with a 12-piece choir.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.08am GMT
block-time published-time 9.43am GMT 
People are gathering in Cape Town's Keizergracht Street. The weather for the march there looks a lot better than London, where 40mph gusts are forecast this afternoon.
enltrThe #CapeClimateMarch crowds are gathering! For the love of our #CoolClimate ! #ClimateMarch#EmissionsMustFallpic.twitter.com/kVLRQ2hlw
 - Cape Climate March (@CTClimateMarch) November 29, 2015
enltrLet's ROLL team! @CTClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/HSvl4Nivpa
 - Greenpop (@GreenpopSA) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 9.34am GMT 
 Summary  
Good morning from London, where march organisers are hoping to beat the turn-out of last year's climate march which attracted around 27,000 people. The march starts at noon (local time) at Park Lane.
In Paris, as Claire pointed out, the planned march was forbidden over security fears. But thousands of shoes have been left in the Place de la Republique as an installation instead, among them a pair with Pope Francis's name on and the the inscription Laudato Si' (Praised be). 
Cardinal Turkson, seen as a potential future Pope, said: 
All members of the Catholic community are warmly invited to offer their support in prayer, word and action. And we're inviting all the bishops and priests around the world to offer the celebration of the Eucharist, on 29 November, for a responsible and successful international conference and summit. We want to encourage the faithful and many others to exercise their ecological citizenship. 
The BBC's David Shukman is at the scene in Paris:
enltrA sea of shoes in Place de la Republique in Paris: protests are banned here so you have to imagine them #COP21pic.twitter.com/AetuepjzAt
 - David Shukman (@davidshukmanbbc) November 29, 2015
Among those who are bringing their shoes is Yeb Sano, the former Philippines climate negotiator who famously broke down in tears at several summits. He's just finished a weeks-long pilgrimage from Rome to Paris for the climate talks - hence the pilgrim shoes. 
enltrPope Francis has reportedly sent his pair of shoes in solidarity with the March of Shoes in Paris tomorrow. I'll bring my pair pilgrim shoes
- Yeb Saño (@YebSano) November 28, 2015
There's also a group of indigenous people meeting in Paris for a 'healing ceremony' in solidarity with those who lost their lives in the recent terror attacks.
enltr"A moment of prayer & a peace offering" - indigenous people coming together for healing ceremony #Paris@g0ldtoothpic.twitter.com/5Ur7wkYm3I
 - 350 dot org (@350) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37am GMT
block-time published-time 9.14am GMT 
I'm now handing over the live blog to my colleague Adam Vaughan in London, who'll continue the coverage of marches across the globe today.
Thanks for reading and for all your contributions here, on Twitter and via GuardianWitness.
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
Here are some from readers across the globe:
 Bangladesh      Global Climate March - Bangladesh 
Global Climate March - Bangladesh with representation of BRIT from ACTION/2015!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By rahatulashekin
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:38 
    Kenya      The climate change March
In Nairobi Kenya the Climate Change march was very successful,we managed to spread the information to the public,we got support from 350.org which to us was a double plus,and I believe the talk in Paris will bear fruits to our planet.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By fred buluku
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:58 
    New Zealand      Young and old Takaka NZ
300 or so Golden Bay citizens marched up ( and then back down) our small main street to voice our concern about Climate Change...to a Govt that so far isn't taking much notice
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Aroha88
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:06 
block-time published-time 9.03am GMT 
Which countries are doing the most to stop global warming?
Check out how different nations compare in our interactive:
 Related:  Which countries are doing the most to stop dangerous global warming?
block-time published-time 8.47am GMT 
 Beirut march is underway  
Despite the rain, Lebanese protesters are currently marching the streets of the capital, Beirut:
enltrThe March is still going regardless of the rain #ClimateMarch#peoplesclimate@IndyACTpic.twitter.com/IeSyHxlWk7
 - Safa' Al Jayoussi (@Safaaljayoussi) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 8.25am GMT 
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
Demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes in a sign of solidarity:
enltrOur shoes will march for us. Dawn #MarcheClimat#ClimateMarch#ActInParispic.twitter.com/hSEvhzXjsc
 - Nicole Ghio (@nicoleghio) November 29, 2015
Writing in the Guardian last week, Naomi Klein argued that the banning of the Paris march was silencing the very voices that need to be heard at the climate summit:
For just two weeks every few years, the voices of the people who are getting hit first and worst get a little bit of space to be heard at the place where fateful decisions are made. That's why Pacific islanders and Inuit hunters and low-income people of colour from places like New Orleans travel for thousands of miles to attend. The expense is enormous, in both dollars and carbon, but being at the summit is a precious chance to speak about climate change in moral terms and to put a human face to this unfolding catastrophe.
Even in these rare moments, frontline voices do not have enough of a platform in the official climate meetings, in which the microphone is dominated by governments and large, well-funded green groups. The voices of ordinary people are primarily heard in grassroots gatherings parallel to the summit, as well as in marches and protests, which in turn attract media coverage.
Now the French government has decided to take away the loudest of these megaphones, claiming that securing marches would compromise its ability to secure the official summit zone where politicians will meet. 
 Related:  What's really at stake at the Paris climate conference now marches are banned | Naomi Klein
 Related:  Quel est le véritable enjeu de la conférence sur le climat de Paris maintenant que les manifestations sont interdites ?
block-time published-time 8.14am GMT 
 Summary: Australia marches for climate action  
Climate change rallies rolled on across Australia on Sunday, following well attended protests in Melbourne on Friday and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday.
On Sunday, it was the turn of Sydney, Canberra, Adelaide, Hobart and Perth.
Australia's climate-sensitive neighbours in the Pacific were a key focus for the climate change rally in Sydney, with representatives of communities from Pacific nations - including Tuvalu, Nauru, Kiribati and Tonga - prominent at the front of the march from the Domain to Circular Quay.
More than 40,000 people braved Sydney's heat for the rally on Sunday afternoon, calling on Australia to play a lead role in brokering binding emissions targets for the world to keep global temperature rise below 2C, and to commit to greater domestic emissions cuts than the 26% to 28% the government is currently proposing.
In Canberra, people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate about 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number was closer to 6,000
The Perth event started sombrely. At 3.25pm, at least 5,000 people sat in silence in Hay Street Mall to mark people who have lost their lives, homes and livelihoods to the effects of climate change. The group, in their colour blocks, had marched 2km from Wellington Square and stretched the whole 300-metre length, watched by bemused Christmas shoppers clutching plastic bags and taking photos of the crowd.
The march was led by a group from the Noongar Whadjuk nation and addressed by Christian, Islamic, Jewish, and Hindu faith leaders.
You can read the full report here:
 Related:  Climate change protests across Australia - tens of thousands march
block-time published-time 8.02am GMT 
 South Korea's climate march begins  
The Seoul march is underway, with protesters making use of some inventive props:
    Nuns holding balloons prepare to march during a rally in central Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      Participants holding umbrellas with the message "Well for us, Hell for earth" march in Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
And of course it's not just Europe that is yet to march: here's a selection of other cities that will be on the move today. Please do get in touch below the line to share details of others you know or are going to. Again, all times are local.
 Durban, South Africa 
10am at Suncoast Boulevard.
 Cape Town, South Africa 
11am from Cape Peninsula University of Technology.
 Beirut, Lebanon 
Leaving Horsh Beirut at 9am, marchers will take the Damascus Road to reach Beirut Downtown at 12.30pm.
 Kampala, Uganda 
9am from Makerere University Freedom Square.
 Seoul, South Korea 
1pm from Cheonggye Square.
 Kiev, Ukraine 
Shevchenko Park at 12.30pm.
You can find more listings here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55am GMT
block-time published-time 7.37am GMT 
 European marches on Sunday: when and where  
As Europe wakes up on Sunday morning, these are the places to keep an eye on - or head to - for climate marches today. All times are local.
 London 
Rally forming from 12 noon at Park Lane - nearest tube Hyde Park Corner & Green Park.
 Berlin 
Midday at central station.
 Madrid 
Midday at Plaza de Cibeles.
 Barcelona 
11.30am at the Via Laietana.
 Rome 
2pm at Piazza Campo de' Fiori.
 Amsterdam 
Midday at Museum Square.
 Copenhagen 
Leaving 1pm from Den Røde Plads Square in Nørrebro to march to the parliament building, Christiansborg.
 Stockholm 
1pm at Norra Latin schoolyard.
 Budapest 
Erzsébet Square at 1pm.
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
block-time published-time 7.16am GMT 
 Japanese campaigners march in Tokyo  
Japan Today reported that around 1,000 people marched in Tokyo on Saturday, but that organisers had hoped for many more:
Some demonstrators were disappointed that the number of participants was not as many as expected, with  Chigusa Okano, a 22-year-old university student in Tokyo, saying: "I especially want young people to show interest in this matter."
 Alex Brodie, a 41-year-old company worker living in Tokyo, said he finds Japanese people's lack of interest in the issue "pathetic".
"Japan needs to wake up. We need to have solar power on every roof top," he said as he marched with his wife and child, while calling on the Japanese government to push for policies to introduce more renewable energy.
The issue of clean, renewable energy has been a key one since a tsunami swamped the Fukushima nuclear plant in 2011, sending three reactors into meltdown.
"Japan must take the lead in the summit to promote renewable energy because Japan is a rare country that has experienced such a big disaster," rally organiser Daigo Ichikawa told AFP news agency.
    Environmentalists hold up placards that read "Climate Action Now!" during a rally in Tokyo on Saturday. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 6.57am GMT 
 Bangladesh march for climate justice  
AFP reports that  more than 5,000 people took part in climate marches on Saturday across 30 different locations in Bangladesh - a country on the front line of climate change, exposed to rising seas, superstorms and expanding deserts.
    People take part in the global climate march in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Saturday. Photograph: KM Asad/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
Unity is the theme of the People's Climate rally in Perth. Led by Noongar Whadjuk MCs, and kicked off with a Whadjuk dance to clear the bad spirits, the crowd then listened in silence to a multi-faith speech led by Perth Anglican assistant Bishop Tom Wilmot.
Wilmot introduced Jewish, Hindu and Sikh leaders and made a point of referring to Rateb Jneid, president of the Islamic Council of Western Australia, as his "brother in the faith", repeating: "And he is my brother."
There has been no mention of the Paris attacks, but the group of more than 1000 people, which has now left Wellington Square to march on the city, will sit for a minute's silence in Hay Street Mall to mark those who have already lost their lives, homes and livelihoods from climate-related events. In particular the minute's silence will honour those affected by bushfires, which have killed six people in Australia this November.
 Kevin Jolley, president of the firefighters' union of WA, said that anyone who had spent time on a fire line knew that the effects of man-made climate change were devastating and real. "There are no sceptics on the end of a fire hose," Jolly said. 
block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
 Philippines climate march  
Activists in the Philippines marched on Saturday, with Rappler reporting that thousands took to the streets across several cities, including the capital, Manila.
Agence France-Presse reported:
Some 3,000 people including religious clergy, students and activists marched through the Philippine capital of Manila demanding curbs on emissions to mute the impact of climate change, which is blamed for a spike in disastrous extreme weather.
"Protect our common home" and "climate justice" were written on the placards held aloft by the surging crowd.
"We want to send a message to the rest of the world, especially the world leaders at the climate talks, to say that our survival is not negotiable," said Denise Fontanilla, spokeswoman for the Asian People's Movement on Debt and Development. 
enltrPhilippines #ClimateMarch video from @inquirerdotnet@KSabilloINQhttps://t.co/jvhZrToakn#ClimateJustice
 - Airah Cadiogan (@eightyseas) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.09am GMT 
The Perth marchers are getting ready to go. (Take a look at this post to get up to speed on the colour-coding.) They have been asked to "stay classy" as they march through the city streets, Calla Wahlquist  reports.
enltrStarting to gather into colour blocks. Need a few photos to fit them all in. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/LQeKP57pLC
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.02am GMT 
 Jakarta marches for climate action  
Indonesian president Joko Widodo left Jakarta for Paris this morning. His country has pledged to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 29% by 2030.
But activists say Indonesia could be doing more to reduce its use of fossil fuels.
In September, after months of raging forest fires, Indonesia overtook China and the US to become the world's biggest climate polluter.
    Protesters participate in a climate march in Jakarta on Sunday. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters      
block-time published-time 5.47am GMT 
A reminder: you can contribute to this live blog and our other climate march coverage via GuardianWitness here or the big blue button at the top of this page.
Here are some of the pictures readers have shared so far.
 From Sydney, Australia:      The Ice Cream is Melting 
Sydney Domain, 2015, 29th Nov. Climate Change march
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Valeria Morich
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:32 
    From New Zealand:      Small-town New Zealand rises to the challenge
This parade engaged the creative spirits of a ladies knitting group, a recycle group and puppet makers to express a positive response to the challenges of climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Mairi Jay
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:15 
    From Edinburgh, Scotland:      Scotland's Climate March 28 November
Scotland's huge colourful climate march winding down the Mound
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Caitlin Hamlett
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 4:15 
    From Geneva, Switzerland:      Geneva climate march
5000 thousand people attended the climate march in Geneva this Saturday
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By yvwinteler
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:22 
    From San Luis Obispo, California, US:      Getting ready to March in San Luis Obispo California
We had about 200 people come out today to create a better world. Our Mayor, framers,and children were amongst our speaking demanding action on climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Heidi Harmon
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:44 
block-time published-time 5.33am GMT 
All roads in Sydney's CBD that were closed for the march have now reopened and there are no traffic delays reported.
Safe journey home, Sydney marchers. Keep reading the blog, though. There's plenty more to come ...
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
 Perth march begins  
Noongar Whadjuk man Noel Nannup  gives the welcome, saying: "Our planet is dying." 
Protesters say the fight for the climate can't be separated from the right of Indigenous people to country, Calla Wahlquist reports from the Perth rally.
enltrNoongar spirit dance to clear the bad spirits. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/btF1ovxCEO
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
More than 300 people are gathered in coloured clumps under the trees that line Perth's Wellington Square, ahead of the people's climate rally.
One of those is Gerard Siero, an ecological urbanism researcher at UWA (the University of Western Australia), who is wearing a yellow linen suit and leaning against his folding bike, which collapsed down to a 10kg stick for ease of commuting. He's marching for the solutions to climate change.
"We have all the solutions we need to solve the problem," Siero said. "We don't have the will on behalf of our politicians, but we have the will on behalf of the people.
"What we are really trying to march with today is to let the politicians know that they have to get out of the way."
Siero said Australia had the capacity and technology to switch off carbon, but it was fast running out of time. "We're at the point where if we don't so something it will be too late to do anything but get out the ambulances," he said.
block-time published-time 4.57am GMT 
 Sydney lord mayor: 'at least 45,000 marchers'  
 Clover Moore, Sydney's lord mayor, says these numbers would make today the biggest climate march ever held in the city :
enltrI've just been told by organisers there were at least 45,000 people, making it the biggest climate march ever in Sydney #PeoplesClimate
 - Clover Moore (@CloverMoore) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.49am GMT 
My colleague Calla Wahlquist  is in Perth, where marchers will be setting off in later today:
enltrMore than 100 people have already gathered at Wellington Square, clinging to the shade on the fringe. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Lu9BkNIvtm
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
We'll be following the progress of that march once it gets underway too, plus you can keep an eye on updates @callapilla.
block-time published-time 4.41am GMT 
With the march in Paris - host of the COP21 climate summit - cancelled after the terrorist attacks of 13 November, activists have turned to other ways of showing their support for the global climate march, Reuters reports:
Activists plan to join arms and form a "human chain" in Paris on Sunday to urge action on global warming, in a muted rally after attacks on the city by Islamic State. 
More than 2,000 climate events are planned in cities including Sydney, Jakarta, Berlin, London, Sao Paulo and New York, making it one of the biggest days of action on climate change in history, organisers say. 
Activists in France scaled back their plans when the government imposed a state of emergency after the attacks two weeks ago killed 130 people, banning the planned demonstration in Paris, meant as the biggest of all. 
In France, activists plan to form a static human chain, formed by about 3,400 people joining arms along what had been the original 3km (1.9 miles) route through central Paris from the Place de la Republique to Place de la Nation. 
"This is a moment for the whole world to join hands," said Iain Keith, campaign director for Avaaz, one of the organisers. 
Separately, more than 10,000 demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes to form a big pile in a sign of solidarity. Organisers said the Vatican even sent a pair to represent Pope Francis. 
     Shoes are symbolically placed on a sidewalk in Paris near the Place de la Republique. Photograph: Eric Gaillard/Reuters    
 Alix Mazounie of French Climate Action Network said the activists reckoned a human chain would not violate the state of emergency. 
"This is not civil disobedience," she said. The chain would break, for instance, wherever it crossed a road to avoid disrupting traffic. 
But, underscoring security worries, France put 24 green activists under house arrest before the summit, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve said on Saturday, saying they were suspected of planning violent protests at the talks. 
Foreign minister  Laurent Fabius welcomed the worldwide demonstrations. "It is very positive," Fabius said, for governments to feel public pressure to act.
block-time published-time 4.22am GMT 
While Australian PM  Malcolm Turnbull  heads to Paris for the climate summit, Puppet Malcolm decided to take a turn in the Sydney march:
    A giant Malcolm Turnbull puppet joins tens of thousands of marchers in Sydney's Domain as part of the global people's climate march on Sunday 29 November 2015. Photograph: Janine Israel/Guardian   
And it seems he brought an old, um, pal with him:
undltr @GuardianAuspic.twitter.com/BrQ359YOUn
 - Susan Mackay (@mackaysuzie) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.08am GMT 
The Sydney march is well and truly on the move, reports Ben Doherty :
Playing 'Hot, Hot, Hot' as they march down Macquarie St towards the Opera House. Jubilant, boisterous mood.
     Sydney protesters march down Macquarie St in the people's climate march. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 4.05am GMT 
The Canberra march has wrapped up without incident, and ACT Policing has issued Guardian Australia with this statement from operation commander Jo Cameron :
There was a large, well-behaved crowd and it was a peaceful event. There were no arrests and no incidents.
There were some road closures during the march, which were opened as soon as possible.
As you were, Canberra. Carry on with your weekend.
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
My colleague Janine Israel has also been at the Sydney rally, and reports that many Islander and Indigenous communities are represented at the march.
She spoke to members of Australia's Tongan community. One protester told her:
Our islands are drowning. Where are we going to go?
     Members of Australia's Tongan community at the Sydney people's climate march. Photograph: Janine Israel for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.43am GMT 
 What are Australia's climate targets?  
Australia's prime minister,  Malcolm Turnbull, will arrive in Paris later tonight for key international climate talks, armed with a climate target that's lower than many other developed countries.
The Australian government has committed to cutting emissions by 26%-28% of 2005 levels by 2030.
By comparison, the United States has vowed to cut emissions by 26%-28% too - but five years earlier than Australia, by 2025.
Canada has committed to a 30% cut and so has New Zealand, while the European Union has vowed to reduce emissions by 40% of 1990 levels by 2030.
The Labor party released its own targets on Friday. It wants a 45% cut by 2030, a figure Turnbull has criticised as "heroic" and expensive.
But modelling by leading economist Warwick McKibbon, did not find a large difference in the economic impacts of the targets. A reduction of 26% would shave between 0.2% and 0.3% of the GDP, while a 45% reduction would see between 0.5% and 0.7% lost. 
block-time published-time 3.32am GMT 
Helpful reminder for those marching in Sydney right now:
enltrQuick PSA for Sydney: there are water stations dotted around. You should drink some #climatemarch#peopleclimatepic.twitter.com/JC6NySchf8
 - GetUp! (@GetUp) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
The crowds in Sydney have observed one minute's silence to reflect upon those most affected by climate change, ended by the sounding of a didgeridoo.
Many of those there are saying that the Domain - no small space - is almost full to capacity.
Once the speeches and songs are finished, the rally is set to march through the streets of Sydney in colour-coordinated blocks:
yellow for "solutions", eg renewables.
orange for "just transitions", advocating for fair jobs.
red to stand with those already on the front line of climate change.
purple for diversity of faith and cultures.
blue to represent future generations.
white for those in healthcare and science.
blue to stand up for threatened ecosystems.
and a group marching for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The crowd listen to speeches at the Domain in Sydney, Australia, on 29 November 2015 as part of global climate marches in the lead-up to COP 21 in Paris. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian   
block-time published-time 3.10am GMT 
Although it is very hot in Sydney today, with protesters - those who weren't canny enough to bring their umbrellas - seeking out whatever shade they can find, activists are well aware that the real front line against climate change lies further west, in the Pacific islands.
A good primer on that situation is this report by my colleague Oliver Milman :
The cause for concern is clear - Nasa recently reported the world's sea level has risen nearly 8cm since 1992, with the Pacific experiencing a more rapid increase than other oceans.
A rise of around a metre by the end of the century now looks likely. For low-lying islands in the Pacific, this means coastal erosion, saltwater seeping into precious rainwater catchments and ruined crops.
Meanwhile, rising temperatures will heighten the risk of diseases, including those carried by mosquitos. Cyclones are expected to become more severe. The World Health Organisation estimates climate change will cause around 250,000 deaths globally between 2030 and 2050. 
     Pacific Islands will be on the 'frontline' of climate change, the Sydney climate change march is told. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.03am GMT 
My colleague  Ben Doherty is in Sydney's Domain, sheltering from the sun and hearing from Professor Tim Flannery, one of Australia's leading climate change activists, who says today "looks like the largest climate march ever in Australia ".
The Paris talks, he said, are the last chance to save "many things we care about, like the Great Barrier Reef ... We are coming to this issue very late."
There are no easy fixes to the climate problem, he warned, but Australia needs to close down polluting industries and dependence on fossil fuels:
We are meeting in the home city of the Australian prime minister. We need to send a very powerful message to him: do what the people demand.
He said the Australian people would not accept anything less than a successful outcome at Paris. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
It was a very peaceful, family-oriented affair in Canberra, as people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate around 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number is closer to 6,000. Canberrans are fairly cautious about protesting, as many are public servants and are often reluctant to make political statements.
One of the coordinators of the event, Emma Robinson from the Conservation Council, said she was not surprised that so many showed up in the capital.
"Climate change is and has always been everyone's business," she said. 
The event was staffed by about 80 volunteers, most of whom are Canberra locals who are part of the Conservation Council.
Former chief scientist of Australia, Penny Sackett, said that protests like Sunday's make people feel as though they are taking action on climate change.
"People can become discouraged because it appears as though [political] change does not happen swiftly enough," she told Guardian Australia.
 She said the march was a message from voters to world leaders who are about to meet on climate change in Paris: "We're watching." 
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
The Canberra Times now estimates there are more than 5,000 people taking part in the march there.
enltrThis gives you a better ideas of the numbers marching down from Parliament House, #Canberra. #peoplesclimate#cbrpic.twitter.com/6aNEeVMYVQ
 - Richard Tuffin (@RichardTuffin) November 29, 2015
Attendance numbers are always a tricky thing with marches, with totals from organisers and police often varying wildly.
Police estimates for Melbourne, for example, put the crowd numbers by the end of Friday night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out.
Similarly, estimates for Brisbane on Saturday came in at between 5,000 and 10,000.
We're yet to hear estimates for the Sydney crowd but organisers already seem overwhelmed by the numbers who have shown up so far.
block-time published-time 2.38am GMT 
An enterprising cyclist at the Adelaide rally:
    A cyclist wears a helmet with a solar panel attached as he participates in a march along the main street of Adelaide. Photograph: David Gray/Reuters   
Meanwhile, some Sydney marchers seek out the shade:
enltrToo hot out in the middle! #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Y7ejzXipdt
 - Paddy Manning (@gpaddymanning) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
 Sydney is go!  
The Sydney rally is underway, with thousands already in attendance and many more still arriving:
enltrThe power is ours! Yehhhh Sydney! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/BqqlzByULb
 - Greenpeace Aus Pac (@GreenpeaceAustP) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge #greens turnout for #PeoplesClimate !! Rally starting now. pic.twitter.com/laNbMg50Y4
 - Greens NSW (@GreensNSW) November 29, 2015
 Ben Doherty is now in the Domain, from where the march is leaving, and reports "massive numbers":
Much more multi-coloured than the Hyde Park beginnings, people in all manner of colours, lots of associated causes: anti-nuclear, church groups, refugee groups.
One guy has a mallard on his head, and a tree growing out of his backpack.
Sydney lord mayor Clover Moore tells the crowd that COP21 in Paris will be the most important meeting of our lifetime.
"On it depends the future of our planet," she says.
block-time published-time 2.18am GMT 
Hello Hobart! Tasmanian marchers are also assembling, with a minute's silence for Paris, which is hosting this week's climate talks, but - after the terrorist attacks of 13 November - will not be holding its own climate march:
enltrA min of silence for #Paris & imagining a clean, compassionate future in #Hobart at #peoplesclimate march #cop21pic.twitter.com/p57G5JG1Yz
 - Claire Havens (@ClaireHavens) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.07am GMT 
My colleague Ben Doherty is with the Sydney marchers and sends this dispatch from the start line:
 At the Sydney march, there are red shirts everywhere. Solid, if not yet spectacular numbers are gathering at the north end of Hyde Park, and marching into the Domain in bright sunshine. 
Labor deputy leader Tanya Plibersek, who brought her own phalanx of rosily-attired Young Laborites, gave a rangy press conference at which she rejected the 'heroic' label Malcolm Turnbull  affixed to Labor's emissions targets (it wasn't meant as a compliment, Plibersek seems to suspect).
She condemned Turnbull for "stopping off on the way to Paris to lecture other heads of government to do more on climate change, while he is doing less".
Plibersek said Labor's targets would require significant change in Australia, but that the country had already seen, and embraced, change aimed at reducing emissions.
She said the $1m Australia has offered to contribute to the Commonwealth's new Climate Finance Access Hub (established at the CHOGM meeting in Valetta) was "pathetically puny".
The hub will be set up to help small island nations vulnerable to climate change access global funds for mitigation and adaptation.
Plibersek said Australia, given its role as a leader in the Pacific region, needed to do more to help its neighbours, some of whom face "an existential threat" from climate change.
 Related:  Turnbull says Shorten's 'heroic' climate target aimed at making political point
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08am GMT
block-time published-time 2.02am GMT 
Sydney marchers are also warming up - as is the weather, with that blue sky deciding to put in an appearance after all - and is expected to be the biggest Australian march of the day. Will NSW be able to best Melbourne's 40,000+ from Friday ?
Reader Tim Senior and friends are well stocked with placards for the Sydney rally:
enltrOn our way to the #peoplesclimate#climatemarch. On public transport of course! pic.twitter.com/FMs5JiOPXZ
 - Tim Senior (@timsenior) November 29, 2015
A reminder: do keep your pictures, videos, thoughts and headcounts coming, to me directly @Claire_Phipps or via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of the blog. Thank you!
block-time published-time 1.53am GMT 
My colleague Shalailah Medhora is at the Canberra march, which has just started. She estimates there are around 3,000 people there so far:
enltrAnd they're off! Around 3,000 on the march to the tent embassy. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/Def0zmsbqz
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
enltr"There are no climate sceptics at the end of a hose". ACT firefighters union at climate rally. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/HYP0ASWQoC
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
I'll be tracking the progress of the Canberra march - along with the others today - on this live blog, plus you can keep an eye on it via @shalailah.
block-time published-time 1.40am GMT 
Many thousands of people marched in New Zealand on Saturday, with more events today: check here for those listings.
An estimated 7,000 turned out in Wellington:
enltr @Claire_Phipps we had a fantastic turn out in Wellington yesterday! #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/rFlsGye4YB
 - Torken Faddy (@TFaddy) November 29, 2015
And there were around 15,000 marchers in Auckland, with 8,000 more in Christchurch:
    Protesters of all ages marched in Christchurch, New Zealand, on Saturday. Photograph: PJ Heller/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 What is likely to be agreed in Paris?  
We know already what the biggest emitters have committed to:
The EU will cut its emissions by 40%, compared with 1990 levels, by 2030.
The US will cut its emissions by 26% to 28%, compared with 2005 levels, by 2025.
China will agree that its emissions will peak by 2030.
Nations responsible for more than 90% of global emissions have now come up with their targets - known in the UN jargon as intended nationally determined contributions, or INDCs.
These include all of the major developed and developing countries, though their contributions vary: in the case of developed countries, actual cuts in emissions, but for developing countries a range of targets including limits on emissions compared to "business as usual", and pledges to increase low-carbon energy or preserve forests.
Analysis of the INDCS, endorsed by the UN, has suggested that these pledges are enough to hold the world to about 2.7C or 3C of warming. That is not quite enough to meet the scientific advice.
However, that is not the end of the story. One of the key components of any Paris agreement would be to institute a system of review of the emissions targets every five years, with a view to ratcheting them upwards.
Another, and complementary, approach is to make more effort to bring down emissions outside the UN process, for instance by engaging "non-state actors" such as cities, local governments and businesses to do more.
block-time published-time 1.27am GMT 
 Canberra march gets started  
It's Canberra's turn now, and again it looks to be a very healthy turnout under a beautiful blue sky (it's rather grey here in Sydney, not that that should put anyone off):
enltr #peoplesclimate March kicking off in Canberra! pic.twitter.com/d11z8jJYC6
 - Fair Go For Canberra (@FairGoCanberra) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 1.13am GMT 
 Adelaide march begins  
The Adelaide rally is underway and it's a good turnout, estimated in the thousands:
enltrOver 5000 in #Adelaide marching for jobs, justice & a safe #climate ! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/bn7LsXdm4f
 - AYCC (@AYCC) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge turnout for the #adelaide#peoplesclimate march pic.twitter.com/5eD9KDQWIX
 - Michael Garrod (@MickyJim74) November 29, 2015
enltrMarching for our planet! #climatemarch#adelaide#climatechange#peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/IPVvmxVTcz
 - Mike Crowhurst (@TheCunningCrow) November 29, 2015
A reminder: you can contribute your own pictures and videos via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of this live blog, and/or to me @Claire_Phipps.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.13am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
Avaaz, the campaign group behind the march, says more than 120,000 people have already taken part - with thousands of rallies yet to take place on Sunday, the main day of action. 
Thousands of people marched in Brisbane on Saturday - organisers put it at 10,000 - and more in Darwin, following Friday's 40,000-strong rally in Melbourne. 
Organisers said thousands took part in 35 New Zealand locations - the smallest being on Raoul Island, where the island's entire population of seven turned out.
My colleague Melissa Davey was at the Melbourne march on Friday evening and sent this report:
Thousands of people were marching through Melbourne's CBD on Friday evening in what is expected to the largest in a series of climate change protests being held throughout Australia over the weekend.
They gathered in front of the state library and, as the lawns filled with protesters putting finishing touches on their placards, they took to the surrounding roads just in time for peak hour.
Environmentalists, unionists, religious organisations, youth groups, doctors, Indigenous organisations, and people from the aid and development sector were part of the crowd. Police estimates put the crowd numbers by the end of the night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out for the event.
 Related:  Victorians take to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change
block-time published-time 12.56am GMT 
 Why Paris, why now?  
After the terrorist attacks of 13 November, the meeting of world leaders in the French capital beginning on Monday has an added poignancy.
But the COP 21 talks - it stands for conference of the parties, the yearly United Nations climate change conference; this is the 21st - will focus on hammering out a new global agreement to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and with them the threat of climate change.
Here are a couple of key questions answered by the Guardian's environment reporter Fiona Harvey :
 Why now? 
Current commitments on greenhouse gas emissions run out in 2020, so at Paris governments are expected to produce an agreement on what happens for the decade after that at least, and potentially beyond.
 Why is this important? 
Scientists have warned that if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, we will pass the threshold beyond which global warming becomes catastrophic and irreversible. That threshold is estimated as a temperature rise of 2C above pre-industrial levels, and on current emissions trajectories we are heading for a rise of about 5C.
That may not sound like much, but the temperature difference between today's world and the last ice age was about 5C, so seemingly small changes in temperature can mean big differences for the Earth.
 Will world leaders go to Paris? 
Yes. The heads of state or government of more than 130 countries have already said they will come. These include French president Francois Hollande, Barack Obama of the US, Xi Jinping of China, Narendra Modi of India, Angela Merkel  of Germany, Australia's Malcolm Turnbull, John Key of New Zealand and David Cameron of the UK.
Unlike the Copenhagen talks in 2009, however, at which world leaders turned up at the last minute of the two weeks of talks, this time the leaders will arrive at the beginning of the conference, give their negotiating teams clear instructions, and expect a fully formed agreement at the end of it.
 Related:  Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
block-time published-time 12.48am GMT 
 Marches in Australia  
Some Australian cities have already met and marched, with Melbourne getting in first on Friday evening, and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday. I'll have reports and pictures from those marches on this live blog shortly, along with news from New Zealand, which held most of its events on Saturday too.
Here's the line-up for today:
 Adelaide : Action started from 11am local (11.30am AEDT) at Ester Lipman Gardens, adjacent to the Torrens Parade Ground. 
 Canberra:  Speakers from 12 midday at Parliament Lawns before the march to the Tent Embassy grounds and West Lawns.
 Sydney : Marchers are asked to gather at 12.30 for a 1pm start from the Domain.
 Hobart : March begins at 1pm from Parliament Lawns.
 Perth : Another 1pm start (4pm AEDT), from Wellington Square.
Plus a heap of other marches - if one can heap a march - in other towns and cities: check out the list on the People's Climate March website. 
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Welcome to live coverage of the global climate march - a continent-spanning series of rallies which organisers hope will see millions of people join to highlight the need for a worldwide consensus on tackling climate change ahead of the COP21 talks in Paris, which open tomorrow.
I'll be kicking off this live blog from Sydney, handing over later to colleagues in London and New York, and aiming to bring you updates from marches in all those places and everywhere in between.
Last year, tens of thousands of people demonstrated in London, Paris, Berlin and Brussels; thousands more turned out in Sydney and Brisbane, with 30,000 thronging the streets of Melbourne. In New York, more than 300,000 marchers took part, on a day of 2,700 simultaneous climate events worldwide.
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
If you're taking part in the marches and want to share a story, an observation, a pun or a picture, please do get in touch below the line or give me a shout on Twitter @Claire_Phipps. I'll tweet key developments from there too.
You can also share your pictures and videos of the march via GuardianWitness here or the blue button at the top of the blog, just up there.

Load-Date: December 1, 2015


End of Document




Davos 2019: Climate change pressure and inequality worries - as it happened; Young people hold a climate change strike on the final day of the World Economic Forum, after campaigner Greta Thunberg addresses delegatesThunberg tells delegates 'our house is on fire'Teenage activist takes School Strikes 4 Climate Action to DavosOxfam: Stop rigging the system for the rich
The Guardian(London)
January 25, 2019 Friday 8:04 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Version:14
Length: 7197 words
Byline: Graeme Wearden in Davos and Angela Monaghan in London
Body


block-time published-time 3.24pm GMT 
 Davos attendees who hung around for the last day heard behavioural scientist Jane Goodall talking a lot of sense. 
She called for: 
"love, compassion and making decisions not based on how this will help my bank account ... but how will it affect future generations."
If only.... 
Goodall, famous for her pioneering work with chimpanzees, also warned that the natural world needs protection. 
"As we destroy the natural environment...we are destroying our own future, our own children and grandchildren. We all care about them, but we're not thinking about how what we do today is stealing their future."
block-time published-time 2.09pm GMT 
Britain's biggest retailers and wholesalers have raised their stockpiling efforts to the highest levels since the 2008 financial crisis, according to a key industry report, with little more than 60 days to go before Brexit.
According to the latest snapshot from the CBI's monthly distributive trades survey, retail businesses raised the ratio of their stocks to expected sales in January to the highest level since February 2008.
The report, which is closely monitored by the Bank of England for early warning signs from the UK economy, said retailers expected demand to fall and had built up stocks in case the UK exits the EU without a deal.
 Related:  Brexit stockpiling by UK retailers and wholesalers reaching 2008 levels, says CBI
block-time published-time 1.49pm GMT 
 Novartis warns a no-deal Brexit will harm patients  
Novartis is the latest firm to warn about the potential pitfalls of a no-deal Brexit, including a shortage of medicines.
The Swiss pharmaceuticals company says it is stockpiling drugs in the UK before a possible no-deal, which it warns would be "hugely impactful for patients, particularly around the supply and safety of medicines".
Read the full story here:
 Related:  Drug firm Novartis fears no-deal Brexit will harm patients
 AM 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.19pm GMT 
Who said deals are never done in Davos?
enltrToday in @Davos, Ueli Maurer and I signed an agreement which will ensure the UK and Swiss            #insurance sectors can continue trading freely with one another after            #Brexit. The UK insurance industry contributes approx. £35bn to our economy and employs over 324,000 people ???? ????            #WEF19           pic.twitter.com/AGgcX62RIZ
 - Philip Hammond (@PhilipHammondUK) January 25, 2019
 AM 
block-time published-time 1.09pm GMT 
Brexit has been a key talking point in Davos, where business leaders have urged clarity from the government amid mounting warnings from firms that a no-deal scenario would be disastrous for jobs and the economy.
One businessman who has consistently taken the opposing view is Tim Martin, the founder and chairman of pub group Wetherspoon and a firm supporter of Brexit.
Martin has been touring his pubs to promote his vision for a no-deal Brexit, and was interviewed by Guardian columnist Owen Jones in Southend-on-Sea. It's fair to say they didn't see eye to eye:
 AM 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.09pm GMT 
The climate change protest is breaking up now. And so is the World Economic Forum, in a rather downbeat mood. 
There's really not been much drama here today, alas. The early finish means many delegates seem to have skipped sessions, and skipped off.
block-time published-time 12.07pm GMT 
More from the Lagarde panel:
enltr @KGeorgieva says the war on extreme poverty will be lost in Sub-Saharan Africa and the weapon of choice has to be digital.            @WorldBank is backing a 'digital moonshot' to help small farmers and use connectivity to link small producers to markets and create entrepreneurs.            #wef19
 - World Economic Forum (@Davos) January 25, 2019
block-time published-time 11.49am GMT 
 The students protesting outside the World Economic Forum are on the right side of history....but are the delegates scurrying past them? 
Greenpeace International executive director, Jennifer Morgan, says she's disappointed that Davos hasn't provided the "moral, business and political" leadership needed to fight global warming.
It is deeply disturbing that, as the world tinkers on the brink of a climate catastrophe, avoiding further temperature rise is not at the very centre of all of the meetings of CEOs and world leaders. The solutions are in front of them and they need to prioritise solving this crisis, join the youth who are leading the way forward and thus be on the right side of history.
Yesterday there were 32,000 school strike students on the streets of Belgium and today children are taking to the streets of Berlin clamouring for an early coal phase-out. The youth are demanding to be heard, the question is, why isn't the Davos elite responding with the scale and pace required? Short-term business interests and making a greater profit, whatever the cost to others, clearly remains the Davos elites priority. We have no time to waste.
block-time published-time 11.42am GMT 
 Photos: Climate protests at Davos  
 Davos delegates are getting a taste of the anger over climate change. 
As they leave the congress hall, they will see a group of young people holding a climate strike - urging world leaders and business chiefs to wake up to the crisis and Actually Do Something, not just talk about it.
It's led, of course, by Thunberg, who has been doing this every Friday outside the Swedish parliament since September...and other children are joining her around the world.
enltrShe's settled outside the Davos security gates with three other youth so far, and the media attention is huge pic.twitter.com/1pesllwLK2
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrA local 19 year old has joined the strike and says she hope this kind of action becomes regular around WEF until change is made pic.twitter.com/Kd2ifNDIkN
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrAround a dozen young people have now gathered to protest alongside Greta pic.twitter.com/ndSP67lvPY
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrThere's now around 30 youth with @GretaThunberg and some passing Davos attendees are stopping to take a look. Police are keeping watch but one policenan assured me there are no plans to intervene as long as it stays peaceful            pic.twitter.com/6nbenXEaGC
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
block-time published-time 11.30am GMT 
More highlights from Greta Thunberg's press conference:
enltrGreta thinks she has been heard by people at Davos, but maybe not listened to by the most important attendees
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrShe hasn't met with coal, oil and gas companies at Davos but if she did, Greta would tell them they have committed crimes against humanity for failing to act on information they've had for years on their impact on climate change
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrShe is proud of the impact she has had the behaviours of even her immediate family. Greta's mother was an opera singer who flew often for work but she eventually changed careers in order to reduce her carbon footprint
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
block-time published-time 11.28am GMT 
Economist Mariana Mazzucato is outlining how to encourage innovation, and warning that some popular policy measure are flawed.
R&D tax credits sometimes don't work, she says, because companies use them to fund research they'd have paid for anyway.
The smart answer is to use "granular instruments" - ie rewarding companies who create jobs, rather than basing it on profits.
That's why the patent box beloved of George Osborne doesn't really work, she explains -- it simply lowers profits and potentially fuels the problem of inequality.
Bottom line - businesses invest when their expectations about growth opportunities are high.
block-time published-time 11.19am GMT 
 It's a mistake to fight technology because you fear it will make some jobs redundant, argues Kganyago. 
You can't protect the job of an encyclopedia salesman, because the internet took that job away.
You should protect the people, not the jobs, he adds.
Fair point. But with a jobless rate of 27%, you can see why South Africa's unions are worried.
block-time published-time 11.12am GMT 
 Lagarde's panel has turn to demographics and the world of work. 
Japan's ageing society has caused a labour shortage. BoJ central bank chief Haruhiko Kuroda says this has forced farms and companies to embrace automation.
But South Africa faces a different challenge - trying to get its younger population up to speed for the 4th Industrial Revolution.
Lesetja Kganyago, governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), says policymakers need to "invest in the capabilities of young people so they can embrace technologies.
 If not, the resulting skills gap will hurt its economy. 
The future of work is going to be different, Kganyago says, so South Africa needs to broaden the skills base, and think differently about the education system.
Does the curriculum we have, in various institutions, cater for the needs of the changing economy, so that when these young people come through the educational system they can engage with an economic system that is being drive by technology?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13am GMT
block-time published-time 10.59am GMT 
 World Bank CEO: Think of the children on climate change  
Kristalina Georgieva has also got the message that climate change is going to hurt younger generations, (who didn't create the problem, of course).
She tells delegates:
When you think about climate, get a photo of your children and grandchildren in front of you. I guarantee you it will change your perspective. I did this and it works.
block-time published-time 10.57am GMT 
Kristalina Georgieva, World Bank CEO, says global leaders can help fight climate change by eliminating harmful subsidies [on energy and agriculture, for example]. 
Georgieva says progress has been made - these harmful subsidies have shrunk from $600bn to $300bn, but "we still have $300bn to go".
She cites Egypt as a good example -they cut subsidies from 7% of GDP to 3%.
However, that risks harming vulnerable people (who suffer when petrol prices spike)
She insists that moving to a low-carbon economy is good economics, creating new jobs in cutting-edge technology areas.
So, those who tell you that low carbon is bad for the economy - don't bite.
Thirdly, we need to provide more support for countries who didn't create the climate crisis - but are suffering the damage. She cites Niger, Chad, and small island states.
block-time published-time 10.47am GMT 
 Christine Lagarde begins by singling out the issue of climate change (maybe Greta had a word...) 
Average surface temperature has risen by nearly once degree Celcius since the late 19th century.
Most of the warming has occurred in the last 35 years., with the five warmest years on record experienced since 2010.
If we don't make the minimum global effort, which will be hopefully upped next year, to curb emissions, rising temperatures will wipe out whole segments of economies, not to mention the dramatic human damage it will cause.
The poorest countries will be most affected, she adds, but advanced economies will not be immune.
block-time published-time 10.40am GMT 
 The final main event of Davos, on the state of the global economy, is underway. 
But the cavernous congress hall is remarkably empty -- so much that our Larry Elliott has bagged a front row seat.
It looks like there's only few hundred people -- many delegates have already checked out.
The panel is being chaired by IMF chief Christine Lagarde. We have World Bank chief Kristalina Georgieva, South Africa's central bank governor Lesetja Kganyago, Japan's central bank governor Haruhiko Kuroda, and economics professor Mariana Mazzucato. 
block-time published-time 10.32am GMT 
Thunberg is now addressing the media, repeating her warning about the urgent need to reduce emissions.
enltr"I don't want you to be hopeful" Greta says, she wants us to panic pic.twitter.com/WndxhteUQD
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
block-time published-time 10.17am GMT 
 Bad luck, Davos Man, Money doesn't make you happy  
 Three Yale university psychology professors who are experts in well being have an uncomfortable message for the wealth-seeking billionaires in Davos: your brains are lying to you. 
Laurie Santos, one of the trio, says: 
"One reason we are not as happy as we could be is because our minds are lying to us. It asks us to want the wrong sort of stuff. It tells us that more money bring us happiness."
Santos says that more money does lead to happiness but only at relatively low levels of income.
"Once you get much above the poverty line happiness flatlines".
Santos's colleague Hedy Kober says that if Davos is serious about sustainability and tackling climate change, it should look at the Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, which measures gross national happiness as an alternative to gross domestic product.
Kober says:
"If our goals are happiness and well being, we are doing it wrong."
block-time published-time 10.04am GMT 
 UK health minister on genome sequencing. 
enltrUK health secretary Matt Hancock is featuring on a Davos panel this morning covering genome sequencing at birth
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrHancock starts the session by plugging Genomics England, which he said in December successfully hit its target of 100K whole genomes fully sequenced. The goal is to reach 1m in the UK over the next 5 years
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrThe panel is asked whether they've had their own genomes sequenced. Hancock says his half brother bought him a 23andMe kit for Christmas, but it's still sitting in his kitchen and he's mulling whether to use it. "So this is a live debate in the Hancock household," he says
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
enltrHancock says the ethics of genome sequencing is "very straight forward" in cases where a baby is ill, thought its still a clinical decision that takes place with their guardians. He clarifies that the UK sequencing is paid for by taxpayers via the NHS
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) January 25, 2019
Questions have turned to how genetic information can be used by private companies like insurers to determine costs/premiums. Hancock points out how insurance firm Sheilas' Wheels only offered insurance to women on the base that they posed lower risk. That was deemed unlawful by the EU. Hancock says there is "absolutely" a role for government in deciding what information is and isn't valid in the provision of insurance (and presumably other services). There's also a question of who owns genetic data, which Hancock stresses should be controlled under consent of the individual. The health secretary said choice needs to be central to the question of genome sequencing. 
"Not allowing people to opt out...would be a huge imposition of the state into people's lives."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.20am GMT
block-time published-time 9.39am GMT 
 Greta Thunberg: it's time to panic on climate change     Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg (L), 16, meets with Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Photograph: Gian Ehrenzeller/EPA   
Climate activist Greta Thunberg has lived up to her pledge to warn Davos to address the climate crisis.
She told us yesterday that she had chosen to trek to Davos to get her message out.
And a few minutes ago, speaking on a panel session, she told delegates she was here to tell them that "Our house is on fire", due to greenhouse gas emissions and rising global temperatures.
Thunberg started striking from school last summer to press Swedish MPs to meet their Paris Agreement obligations. 
At places like Davos, people like to tell success stories, but financial success has come with an unthinkable price tag on climate change.
We have failed.
     Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg Photograph: Gian Ehrenzeller/EPA   
Thunberg added that the media haven't managed to create enough awareness of the urgent problems of climate change. But, it's not too late....
It's a simple issue. We need to stop emissions of greenhouse gases. Either we do that or we don't. Either we prevent 1.5 degrees of warming, or we don't.
There are no grey areas when it comes to survival.
Adults like to say that they want to give their children hope. I don't want your hope. I want you to panic. I want you to feel the fear I feel every day.
I want you to feel as it the house is on fire, because it is.
Christiana Figueres, the former head of the UN's climate change group, backs Thunberg, saying
She's right, we have not panicked enough.
 Related:  Teenage activist takes School Strikes 4 Climate Action to Davos
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.46am GMT
block-time published-time 9.26am GMT 
 You know the tax system is in trouble when even the accountants won't defend it! 
Bob Moritz, the chairman of accountancy giant PcW, has told Davos that today's taxation systems are old, outdated and not fit for the future.
They were set up for protectionism, he explains, as countries fought over each other to attract companies.
You're telling us that people want to pay more tax?!
Moritz doesn't go that far, but is damning about the status quo:
We want to pay our fair share of taxes, but the reality is the tax laws and regulations we have today are absolutely antiquated and not fit for the multiple stakeholders that we have to focus on.
All very worthy. But lets not forget that PwC was roasted by MPs a few years ago for selling tax avoidance on an industrial scale. Talk is cheap ( well, as much as anything is cheap in Davos )
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.49am GMT
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
 Oxfam: Time to stop rigging economy for the rich  
 Winnie Byanyima, executive director of Oxfam International, has delivered a stinging blast at governments for not tackling wealth inequality. 
We are now in an economy that is really rigged, so that a few get better off and others now. 
With this kind of extreme inequality, many will remain stuck in poverty, says Byanyima, citing World Bank data which shows the rate of reducing extreme poverty has slowed, and continues to slow.
How bad is the situation? Very bad:
 3.4 billion people are just a crop failure, or a medical bill away, from falling back into extreme poverty, because they're earning no more than $5.5 per day. 
Rich companies, rich people, have been able to write the rules of the economy so they are winners and others are losers.
She thinks a universal basic income would do some good, but ultimately we need a wealth tax, to create fiscal space for education and healthcare (an idea that is rocketing back up the political agenda)
And she warns that austerity in rich countries is hurting women particularly badly:
Women are pulling out of work to care for the sick, of the elderly, of disabled people.
This is because governments have sat back, not done their job and allowed a few to take away the bulk of the wealth.
block-time published-time 8.56am GMT 
A quick audience poll at a Davos panel on wealth inequality shows that 61% don't support a basic income.
block-time published-time 8.54am GMT 
 European markets rise after gains in Asia  
Investors are in a relatively upbeat mood this morning, with European markets up across the board following gains in Asia.
    • FTSE 100: +0.3% at 6,837
    • Germany's DAX: +1.1% at 11,253
    • France's CAC: +0.7% at 4,905
    • Italy's FTSE MIB: +0.8% at 19,724
    • Spain's IBEX: +0.7% at 9,210
    • Europe's STOXX 600: 0+0.7% at 358
Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets:
Despite the ongoing uncertainties around US, China trade markets in Europe have opened higher this morning, taking a positive lead from a strong performance for Asia markets. 
 It's been a decent week for markets in Asia with the Nikkei 225 closing higher for the third week in a row, the first time that has happened since October last year.
 AM 
block-time published-time 8.40am GMT 
 Chancellor Philip Hammond has just arrived at the Congress Centre.  
He wouldn't stop to talk and his team has said he's on his way to a "bilateral meeting" downstairs but would not say with who. He was with about half a dozen staff, with a camera in tow.
Hammond has pulled out of this morning's session on the global economy, which was officially blamed on work pressures. However, Davos insiders told us that the Treasury objected to him being on the same platform as the economist Mariana Mazzucato (which the Treasury denied). 
block-time published-time 8.35am GMT 
Never mind Khashoggi, let's make money!
That, I'm afraid, is Saudi Arabia's message to Davos - as illustrated by this massive poster outside the congress centre.
    A poster at the World Economic Forum Photograph: Guardian   
It's a timely reminder that money counts for more than morals round here. Just months after Jamal Khashoggi's brutal murder, Saudi delegates aren't being cold-shouldered here.
As Bloomberg put it :
At an event where success is often measured by who's seen at a reception or speaks on a panel, the Saudis aren't getting the cold shoulder any more. James Gorman, the head of Morgan Stanley, spoke on Thursday in a debate alongside two Saudi ministers. And the likes of Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and John Flint of            HSBC Holdings Plc attended the annual Davos party thrown by Saudi oil giant Aramco, according to a person present.
"I don't think Saudi Arabia is in the penalty box," Gorman said in an interview with Bloomberg TV. Khashoggi's murder "was utterly unacceptable and the world including the Saudis want to understand exactly what happened. In the meantime, Saudi is a country of 32 million people. These folks deserve a shot," he said.
block-time published-time 8.15am GMT 
In case you missed it, here is the full story on our interview with Greta Thunberg, the 16-year-old climate change campaigner, who will be addressing delegates in Davos later this morning:
 Related:  Teenage activist takes School Strikes 4 Climate Action to Davos
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.21am GMT
block-time published-time 8.04am GMT 
 Agenda: Christine Lagarde and the global economy  
 Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the final day of the World Economic Forum in Davos, and other events across the economy and the markets. 
In Davos, the global elite will be looking nervously to the future today - with sessions on inequality, bioethics and the global economy. 
IMF chief Christine Lagarde will chair a discussion on the world economy. The global slowdown, the US-China trade war and Brexit have all loomed over WEF this week, so we'll hear what World Bank chief Kristalina Georgieva, South Africa's central bank governor Lesetja Kganyago, Japan's central bank governor Haruhiko Kuroda, and economics professor Mariana Mazzucato have to say.
Delegates will also by digesting George Soros's stinging attack on China last night, when he accused president Xi of using technology such as artificial intelligence to control his population.
 Related:  George Soros: China is using tech advances to repress its people
Swedish 16-year old climate change campaigner Greta Thunberg is bringing her campaign to Davos. She'll be giving a speech to delegates, and conducting her weekly school strike. 
Yesterday she told us:
I have said that every Friday I will sit outside the Swedish parliament until Sweden is in line with the Paris Agreement, and now this Friday I can't be there. So I will have to do it here, and send a message that this is the only thing that matters.
enltrToday I have been invited to meet with Klaus Schwab and Christine Lagarde. Then I will speak to the @wef on "Preparing for climate disruption". At 11:15 I will hold a press conference at Icehouse, Promenade 93. Then there will be a local Davos schoolstrike outside at 12.            #wef19
 - Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) 
January 25, 2019
 The agenda: 
    • 9.15am GMT / 10.15am Davos: Session on "What if everyone had their genome sequenced at birth?" with UK health secretary Matt Hancock.
    • 9.30am GMT / 10.30am Davos: Session on the cost of inequality with primatologist Jane Goodall and Oxfam's Winnie Byanyima
    • 10.30am GMT/11.30am Davos: Session on the global economy with Christine Lagarde, Kristalina Georgieva, Lesetja Kganyago, Haruhiko Kuroda, and Mariana Mazzucato
    • 10.15am GMT/11.15am Davos: Greta Thunberg gives speech on the urgent need to combat climate change
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.36am GMT
  3145 2019-01-28T08:00:00Z true 2019-01-25T08:04:28Z false false 2019-01-25T16:15:07Z 
false UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/ahck6 false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/26a6281d2a87ec1f44534e170c4d647c63e3ed36/0_120_3609_2165/500.jpg false en Davos attendees who hung around for the last day heard behavioural scientist Jane Goodall talking a lot of sense. She called for: "love, compassion and making decisions not based on how this will help my bank account ... but how will it affect future generations." If only.... Goodall, famous for her pioneering work with chimpanzees, also warned that the natural world needs protection. "As we destroy the natural environment...we are destroying our own future, our own children and grandchildren. We all care about them, but we're not thinking about how what we do today is stealing their future." Britain's biggest retailers and wholesalers have raised their stockpiling efforts to the highest levels since the 2008 financial crisis, according to a key industry report, with little more than 60 days to go before Brexit. According to the latest snapshot from the CBI's monthly distributive trades survey, retail businesses raised the ratio of their stocks to expected sales in January to the highest level since February 2008. The report, which is closely monitored by the Bank of England for early warning signs from the UK economy, said retailers expected demand to fall and had built up stocks in case the UK exits the EU without a deal. Novartis is the latest firm to warn about the potential pitfalls of a no-deal Brexit, including a shortage of medicines. The Swiss pharmaceuticals company says it is stockpiling drugs in the UK before a possible no-deal, which it warns would be "hugely impactful for patients, particularly around the supply and safety of medicines". Read the full story here: AM Who said deals are never done in Davos? AM Brexit has been a key talking point in Davos, where business leaders have urged clarity from the government amid mounting warnings from firms that a no-deal scenario would be disastrous for jobs and the economy. One businessman who has consistently taken the opposing view is Tim Martin, the founder and chairman of pub group Wetherspoon and a firm supporter of Brexit. Martin has been touring his pubs to promote his vision for a no-deal Brexit, and was interviewed by Guardian columnist Owen Jones in Southend-on-Sea. It's fair to say they didn't see eye to eye: AM The climate change protest is breaking up now. And so is the World Economic Forum, in a rather downbeat mood. There's really not been much drama here today, alas. The early finish means many delegates seem to have skipped sessions, and skipped off. More from the Lagarde panel: The students protesting outside the World Economic Forum are on the right side of history....but are the delegates scurrying past them? Greenpeace International executive director, Jennifer Morgan, says she's disappointed that Davos hasn't provided the "moral, business and political" leadership needed to fight global warming. It is deeply disturbing that, as the world tinkers on the brink of a climate catastrophe, avoiding further temperature rise is not at the very centre of all of the meetings of CEOs and world leaders. The solutions are in front of them and they need to prioritise solving this crisis, join the youth who are leading the way forward and thus be on the right side of history. Yesterday there were 32,000 school strike students on the streets of Belgium and today children are taking to the streets of Berlin clamouring for an early coal phase-out. The youth are demanding to be heard, the question is, why isn't the Davos elite responding with the scale and pace required? Short-term business interests and making a greater profit, whatever the cost to others, clearly remains the Davos elites priority. We have no time to waste. Davos delegates are getting a taste of the anger over climate change. As they leave the congress hall, they will see a group of young people holding a climate strike - urging world leaders and business chiefs to wake up to the crisis and Actually Do Something, not just talk about it. It's led, of course, by Thunberg, who has been doing this every Friday outside the Swedish parliament since September...and other children are joining her around the world. More highlights from Greta Thunberg's press conference: Economist Mariana Mazzucato is outlining how to encourage innovation, and warning that some popular policy measure are flawed. R&D tax credits sometimes don't work, she says, because companies use them to fund research they'd have paid for anyway. The smart answer is to use "granular instruments" - ie rewarding companies who create jobs, rather than basing it on profits. That's why the patent box beloved of George Osborne doesn't really work, she explains -- it simply lowers profits and potentially fuels the problem of inequality. Bottom line - businesses invest when their expectations about growth opportunities are high. It's a mistake to fight technology because you fear it will make some jobs redundant, argues Kganyago. You can't protect the job of an encyclopedia salesman, because the internet took that job away. You should protect the people, not the jobs, he adds. Fair point. But with a jobless rate of 27%, you can see why South Africa's unions are worried. Lagarde's panel has turn to demographics and the world of work. Japan's ageing society has caused a labour shortage. BoJ central bank chief Haruhiko Kuroda says this has forced farms and companies to embrace automation. But South Africa faces a different challenge - trying to get its younger population up to speed for the 4th Industrial Revolution. Lesetja Kganyago, governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), says policymakers need to "invest in the capabilities of young people so they can embrace technologies. If not, the resulting skills gap will hurt its economy. The future of work is going to be different, Kganyago says, so South Africa needs to broaden the skills base, and think differently about the education system. Does the curriculum we have, in various institutions, cater for the needs of the changing economy, so that when these young people come through the educational system they can engage with an economic system that is being drive by technology? Kristalina Georgieva has also got the message that climate change is going to hurt younger generations, (who didn't create the problem, of course). She tells delegates: When you think about climate, get a photo of your children and grandchildren in front of you. I guarantee you it will change your perspective. I did this and it works. Kristalina Georgieva, World Bank CEO, says global leaders can help fight climate change by eliminating harmful subsidies [on energy and agriculture, for example]. Georgieva says progress has been made - these harmful subsidies have shrunk from $600bn to $300bn, but "we still have $300bn to go". She cites Egypt as a good example -they cut subsidies from 7% of GDP to 3%. However, that risks harming vulnerable people (who suffer when petrol prices spike) She insists that moving to a low-carbon economy is good economics, creating new jobs in cutting-edge technology areas. So, those who tell you that low carbon is bad for the economy - don't bite. Thirdly, we need to provide more support for countries who didn't create the climate crisis - but are suffering the damage. She cites Niger, Chad, and small island states. Christine Lagarde begins by singling out the issue of climate change (maybe Greta had a word...) Average surface temperature has risen by nearly once degree Celcius since the late 19th century. Most of the warming has occurred in the last 35 years., with the five warmest years on record experienced since 2010. If we don't make the minimum global effort, which will be hopefully upped next year, to curb emissions, rising temperatures will wipe out whole segments of economies, not to mention the dramatic human damage it will cause. The poorest countries will be most affected, she adds, but advanced economies will not be immune. The final main event of Davos, on the state of the global economy, is underway. But the cavernous congress hall is remarkably empty -- so much that our Larry Elliott has bagged a front row seat. It looks like there's only few hundred people -- many delegates have already checked out. The panel is being chaired by IMF chief Christine Lagarde. We have World Bank chief Kristalina Georgieva, South Africa's central bank governor Lesetja Kganyago, Japan's central bank governor Haruhiko Kuroda, and economics professor Mariana Mazzucato. Thunberg is now addressing the media, repeating her warning about the urgent need to reduce emissions. Three Yale university psychology professors who are experts in well being have an uncomfortable message for the wealth-seeking billionaires in Davos: your brains are lying to you. Laurie Santos, one of the trio, says: "One reason we are not as happy as we could be is because our minds are lying to us. It asks us to want the wrong sort of stuff. It tells us that more money bring us happiness." Santos says that more money does lead to happiness but only at relatively low levels of income. "Once you get much above the poverty line happiness flatlines". Santos's colleague Hedy Kober says that if Davos is serious about sustainability and tackling climate change, it should look at the Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, which measures gross national happiness as an alternative to gross domestic product. Kober says: "If our goals are happiness and well being, we are doing it wrong." Questions have turned to how genetic information can be used by private companies like insurers to determine costs/premiums. Hancock points out how insurance firm Sheilas' Wheels only offered insurance to women on the base that they posed lower risk. That was deemed unlawful by the EU. Hancock says there is "absolutely" a role for government in deciding what information is and isn't valid in the provision of insurance (and presumably other services). There's also a question of who owns genetic data, which Hancock stresses should be controlled under consent of the individual. The health secretary said choice needs to be central to the question of genome sequencing. "Not allowing people to opt out...would be a huge imposition of the state into people's lives." Climate activist Greta Thunberg has lived up to her pledge to warn Davos to address the climate crisis. She told us yesterday that she had chosen to trek to Davos to get her message out. And a few minutes ago, speaking on a panel session, she told delegates she was here to tell them that "Our house is on fire", due to greenhouse gas emissions and rising global temperatures. Thunberg started striking from school last summer to press Swedish MPs to meet their Paris Agreement obligations. At places like Davos, people like to tell success stories, but financial success has come with an unthinkable price tag on climate change. We have failed. Thunberg added that the media haven't managed to create enough awareness of the urgent problems of climate change. But, it's not too late.... It's a simple issue. We need to stop emissions of greenhouse gases. Either we do that or we don't. Either we prevent 1.5 degrees of warming, or we don't. There are no grey areas when it comes to survival. Adults like to say that they want to give their children hope. I don't want your hope. I want you to panic. I want you to feel the fear I feel every day. I want you to feel as it the house is on fire, because it is. Christiana Figueres, the former head of the UN's climate change group, backs Thunberg, saying She's right, we have not panicked enough. You know the tax system is in trouble when even the accountants won't defend it! Bob Moritz, the chairman of accountancy giant PcW, has told Davos that today's taxation systems are old, outdated and not fit for the future. They were set up for protectionism, he explains, as countries fought over each other to attract companies. You're telling us that people want to pay more tax?! Moritz doesn't go that far, but is damning about the status quo: We want to pay our fair share of taxes, but the reality is the tax laws and regulations we have today are absolutely antiquated and not fit for the multiple stakeholders that we have to focus on. All very worthy. But lets not forget that PwC was roasted by MPs a few years ago for selling tax avoidance on an industrial scale. Talk is cheap (well, as much as anything is cheap in Davos) Winnie Byanyima, executive director of Oxfam International, has delivered a stinging blast at governments for not tackling wealth inequality. We are now in an economy that is really rigged, so that a few get better off and others now. With this kind of extreme inequality, many will remain stuck in poverty, says Byanyima, citing World Bank data which shows the rate of reducing extreme poverty has slowed, and continues to slow. How bad is the situation? Very bad: 3.4 billion people are just a crop failure, or a medical bill away, from falling back into extreme poverty, because they're earning no more than $5.5 per day. Rich companies, rich people, have been able to write the rules of the economy so they are winners and others are losers. She thinks a universal basic income would do some good, but ultimately we need a wealth tax, to create fiscal space for education and healthcare (an idea that is rocketing back up the political agenda) And she warns that austerity in rich countries is hurting women particularly badly: Women are pulling out of work to care for the sick, of the elderly, of disabled people. This is because governments have sat back, not done their job and allowed a few to take away the bulk of the wealth. A quick audience poll at a Davos panel on wealth inequality shows that 61% don't support a basic income. Investors are in a relatively upbeat mood this morning, with European markets up across the board following gains in Asia. FTSE 100: +0.3% at 6,837 Germany's DAX: +1.1% at 11,253 France's CAC: +0.7% at 4,905 Italy's FTSE MIB: +0.8% at 19,724 Spain's IBEX: +0.7% at 9,210 Europe's STOXX 600: 0+0.7% at 358 Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets: Despite the ongoing uncertainties around US, China trade markets in Europe have opened higher this morning, taking a positive lead from a strong performance for Asia markets. It's been a decent week for markets in Asia with the Nikkei 225 closing higher for the third week in a row, the first time that has happened since October last year. AM Chancellor Philip Hammond has just arrived at the Congress Centre. He wouldn't stop to talk and his team has said he's on his way to a "bilateral meeting" downstairs but would not say with who. He was with about half a dozen staff, with a camera in tow. Hammond has pulled out of this morning's session on the global economy, which was officially blamed on work pressures. However, Davos insiders told us that the Treasury objected to him being on the same platform as the economist Mariana Mazzucato (which the Treasury denied). Never mind Khashoggi, let's make money! That, I'm afraid, is Saudi Arabia's message to Davos - as illustrated by this massive poster outside the congress centre. It's a timely reminder that money counts for more than morals round here. Just months after Jamal Khashoggi's brutal murder, Saudi delegates aren't being cold-shouldered here. As Bloomberg put it: At an event where success is often measured by who's seen at a reception or speaks on a panel, the Saudis aren't getting the cold shoulder any more. James Gorman, the head of Morgan Stanley, spoke on Thursday in a debate alongside two Saudi ministers. And the likes of Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and John Flint of HSBC Holdings Plc attended the annual Davos party thrown by Saudi oil giant Aramco, according to a person present. "I don't think Saudi Arabia is in the penalty box," Gorman said in an interview with Bloomberg TV. Khashoggi's murder "was utterly unacceptable and the world including the Saudis want to understand exactly what happened. In the meantime, Saudi is a country of 32 million people. These folks deserve a shot," he said. In case you missed it, here is the full story on our interview with Greta Thunberg, the 16-year-old climate change campaigner, who will be addressing delegates in Davos later this morning: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the final day of the World Economic Forum in Davos, and other events across the economy and the markets. In Davos, the global elite will be looking nervously to the future today - with sessions on inequality, bioethics and the global economy. IMF chief Christine Lagarde will chair a discussion on the world economy. The global slowdown, the US-China trade war and Brexit have all loomed over WEF this week, so we'll hear what World Bank chief Kristalina Georgieva, South Africa's central bank governor Lesetja Kganyago, Japan's central bank governor Haruhiko Kuroda, and economics professor Mariana Mazzucato have to say. Delegates will also by digesting George Soros's stinging attack on China last night, when he accused president Xi of using technology such as artificial intelligence to control his population. Swedish 16-year old climate change campaigner Greta Thunberg is bringing her campaign to Davos. She'll be giving a speech to delegates, and conducting her weekly school strike. Yesterday she told us: I have said that every Friday I will sit outside the Swedish parliament until Sweden is in line with the Paris Agreement, and now this Friday I can't be there. So I will have to do it here, and send a message that this is the only thing that matters. The agenda: 9.15am GMT / 10.15am Davos: Session on "What if everyone had their genome sequenced at birth?" with UK health secretary Matt Hancock. 9.30am GMT / 10.30am Davos: Session on the cost of inequality with primatologist Jane Goodall and Oxfam's Winnie Byanyima 10.30am GMT/11.30am Davos: Session on the global economy with Christine Lagarde, Kristalina Georgieva, Lesetja Kganyago, Haruhiko Kuroda, and Mariana Mazzucato 10.15am GMT/11.15am Davos: Greta Thunberg gives speech on the urgent need to combat climate change 18118 false false      A student takes part in a "school strike for climate" held on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum (WEF) annual meeting today.        Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg (L), 16, meets with Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).        Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg        A poster at the World Economic Forum     

Load-Date: January 25, 2019


End of Document




Morrison government 'ignored' Climate Change Authority's advice on Covid recovery
The Guardian (London)
October 21, 2020 Wednesday 5:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1012 words
Byline: Adam Morton Environment editor
Highlight: Report hails the chance to jump-start the economy and deal with climate change, but the Coalition prefers a gas-led recovery


Body


The Morrison government has been accused of ignoring advice from one of its agencies that it should use the economic response to Covid-19 to "set up Australia for generations to come" by directing stimulus spending to measures that also addressed the climate crisis.
A Climate Change Authority report submitted to the government in July says the stimulus package offered a "once-in-a-lifetime" chance to jump-start a recovery and deal with climate change by preparing for inevitable impacts and positioning Australia to take advantage of its abundant clean energy resources.
"It's a win-win-win opportunity for economic recovery, resilience and prosperity in a low-emissions world," the report says.
A Senate estimates hearing on Tuesday night was told the report was discussed with the office of the emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, and officials from Treasury and the industry department, which has responsibility for climate change policy.
In response to questions from Labor, the authority's chair, Wendy Craik, said she did not know if Taylor had read it and he had not officially responded to it.
The authority posted the report on its website without fanfare and it received little to no media coverage. It was submitted as governments across the globe were being urged to tackle the climate crisis alongside the pandemic.
The Morrison government has emphasised the need for a gas-led recovery from recession, and announced $52.9m to develop plans to increase gas supply and transportation infrastructure. It re-funded the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (Arena), allocating it $223.9m over the next four years in the budget and promising $1.4bn over a decade while planning to change its mandate, but has been criticised for not doing more to back renewable energy.
Labor's climate spokesman, Mark Butler, accused the government of refusing to engage with the authority's report, saying it was not surprising as it had "completely gutted" the agency after trying and failing to abolish it.
He said backing renewable energy projects and developing clean energy manufacturing would create tens of thousands of jobs, stimulate regional economies and lead to cheaper power prices while tackling climate change.
"To ignore a Covid-19 recovery plan which highlights the massive potential of renewable energy and renewables-related industry is exactly the type of ideological bias that has undermined progress under the Liberals," Butler said.
A spokesperson for Taylor responded that the government was taking action consistent with recent reports by the authority, pointing to a proposed $1bn "grid reliability fund" to expand the remit of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
While the authority said the corporation should be allowed to "invest in emissions reduction technologies in all sectors", Labor has said it would oppose  the change as it would open up the corporation, which operates as a green bank, to fossil fuel investments.
Craik told Senate estimates some issues raised in the report had been picked up by the government "in one way or another", including in a low emissions technology statement that was in the works before the pandemic, support for clean hydrogen and soil carbon, and proposed changes to Arena and the CEFC.
But the report suggests a more holistic climate focus in the pandemic recovery. It calls for a stimulus package that takes account of climate risks and opportunities to create a "virtuous cycle" in which a more prosperous economy led to better preparation for the impacts of climate change, and vice versa.
It cites evidence from the Nobel prize winner Joseph Stiglitz and economist Nicholas Stern suggesting sustainable stimulus measures could offer the best economic returns and says governments in Europe, New Zealand and South Korea had made efforts to head down this path.
The authority defines recovery as being about "getting people back to work and businesses back to business", and says there were many renewable energy projects that could make a strong contribution to that.
"According to the Clean Energy Council, bringing forward the pipeline of renewable energy projects could create over 50,000 new direct jobs, help drive down power prices, triple the amount of large-scale renewable energy capacity in the country and stimulate private investment into rural and regional areas," it says.
It repeats recommendations the authority made in a "climate policy toolkit" report in March, including government support for:
    • Energy efficiency programs targeting low-income households and small businesses including tax incentives and grants.
    • Greater investment in electricity networks and technologies such as batteries and pumped hydro to support variable solar and wind energy.
    • Electrification and industrial energy efficiency projects in regional areas.
    • Electric vehicle charging infrastructure on highways and regional routes, and targets for government fleets to take up the technology.
    • An agency equivalent to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) dedicated to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from "the land sector".
Craik told Senate estimates that Taylor had been briefed on the March report, but there had not been further discussion with him about its recommendations. 
She said the authority was not consulted about the government's plans for a significant gas industry expansion. Its July report says gas can play a role "in the mix" of large-scale sources of electricity generation, and suggests energy deals with states include programs that reduce emissions by improving efficiency in gas production, but it does not call for a government-backed gas-led recovery.
                     Several non-government reports have made suggestions for a green recovery from Covid-19 to set up the economy for the decades ahead. Beyond Zero Emissions, a climate change thinktank, won support from former prime ministers Malcolm Turnbull and Kevin Rudd for an analysis that concluded projects to rapidly cut emissions could modernise industry and create work for an average of 355,000 people a year over five years.

Load-Date: October 21, 2020


End of Document




Climate change activists target Bank of England and Barclays - business live; Mark Carney is giving a press conference after leaving UK interest rates on hold, as protesters urge action on climate changeCarney: Firms need to anticipate new climate rulesBank of England leaves rates on holdBarclays AGM disruptedEarlier:Introduction: Climate activists target Bank of EnglandActivists urge Bank to 'green' its bond-buying programme"Why I will be protesting against Mark Carney on Thursday"
The Guardian(London)
May 2, 2019 Thursday 7:52 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Version:17
Length: 12231 words
Byline: Graeme Wearden
Body


block-time published-time 3.57pm BST 
 Summary: Climate change protests and rate rise hints     Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, speaking during today's press conference Photograph: Matt Dunham/AFP/Getty Images   
Time for a recap:
Activists have challenged the City of London to do more to tackle the climate emergency, but Brexit is still higher up the agenda. 
Protesters descended on the Bank of England today, to urge governor Mark Carney and colleagues to use their regulatory powers to rein in lending to fossil fuel industries
They also want the Bank to use its QE stimulus package to support green companies, not those responsible for carbon emissions. Here's some video from the event.
enltrThe #ClimateEmergency demands all our institutions support rapid decarbonisation and the Bank of England is no exception! It's time to            #GreenTheBoE ?            pic.twitter.com/ExSzF9qWfz
 - David Clarke (@DavidFClarke) May 2, 2019
Speaking after the protest, Fran Boait  of Positive Money  warned that the Bank was "complicit in the climate crisis".
Carney, though, says the Bank's Financial Policy Committee has been taking a lead, encouraging City firms to face the crisi s. He said financial firms must be flexible to changes in policy, as MPs yesterday backed calls to declare a climate emergency.
Speaking after the Bank of England left interest rates unchanged, Britain's top central banker warned that Brexit uncertainty was still weighing on business investment.
But....he also raised the Bank's growth forecasts, and hinted strongly that interest rates could rise faster than the meagre one rate hike expected by markets. 
Protesters also targeted Barclays Bank, which is one of the worse offenders for funding the fossil fuel industry. They demonstrated outside, and even disrupted CEO Jes Staley's speech to shareholders.
enltrDharma Action Network outside Barclays AGM. Barclays blind to the climate crisis.. #climatechange           pic.twitter.com/xfjWGZXDgC
 - Joseph Mishan (@joseph_mishan) May 2, 2019
It was a mixed day for Barclays -- they managed to repel activist investor Edward Bramson's bid for a board seat, but also suffered a backlash over executive pay. 
block-time published-time 3.54pm BST 
Mark Carney's key message today is that interest rates will probably rise faster than investors think, says our economics editor Larry Elliott. 
Investment has fallen for four successive quarters, trade has been a drag on growth and the economy has become even more dependent on the willingness of households to carry on spending.
Investment is expected to bounce back once Brexit has been resolved, while low unemployment and rising real incomes will continue to support household spending. In those circumstances, the MPC is likely to become markedly more hawkish.
 Related:  Interest rates: welcome to UK plc, an economy in limbo | Larry Elliott
block-time published-time 3.23pm BST 
Newsflash: Barclays has suffered a pay revolt, hot on the heels of the climate change protests at its AGM today.
30% of shareholders opposed the bank's remuneration report, a slapdown for CEO Jes Staley and colleagues.
block-time published-time 3.06pm BST 
Some reaction to the Tesla fund-raising drive:
enltr$10m represents a 0.13% increase on Elon's existing 19% $7.8bn stake in Tesla, and means that Elon's stake is actually being reduced via this offering. He's need to spend $125m to keep his stake unchanged). Not a glowing endorsement. https://t.co/SD3yVSVrks
 - Gareth Baines (@DrGABaines) May 2, 2019
enltrWatching Tesla rally on a $650 million stock offering... pic.twitter.com/y97ugvsO9z
 - Greg Guenthner (@GregGuenthner) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 3.00pm BST 
 Tesla raises $2.3bn  
  In other environmental-business news, Tesla launched a new $2.3bn fundraising drive. 
It is raising the cash by issuing new shares and debt. CEO Elon Musk is chipping in $10m personally, following pressure from Wall Street to bolster Tesla's cash reserves.
Tesla needs the money to fund its ongoing expansion plans and hit the production targets. This would quieten sceptics who don't believe Musk will revolutionise the car industry with Tesla's range of electric, self-driving cars.
Reuters explains: 
Analysts have been predicting for months that Tesla would need to raise funds for its expansion plans, which include the construction of a factory in Shanghai, the upcoming Model Y SUV, and the crucial ramp up of Model 3 sedan production.
Shares in Tesla have jumped by 3.75% in early trading, to $242.78.
 Russ Mould, AJ Bell Investment Director, warned last week that Tesla was facing a cash crunch: 
The immediate pressure may be off, now that Tesla has repaid $1.1 billion in convertible bonds that matured in November and March, but Elon Musk and his colleagues face another $566 million repayment this coming November, even as the company continues to consume cash rather than generate it."
"The debate over whether the firm needs to raise fresh capital is therefore not going to go away. Given the loyal band of shareholders he has and the company's massive market capitalisation it would make sense for Mr Musk to do so.
Musk has clearly come to the same conclusion, having seen Tesla's cash pile dip last quarter:
block-time published-time 2.27pm BST 
Just in: photos of climate change protesters being dragged away by security outside Barclays annual investor meeting in London this morning.
block-time published-time 2.21pm BST 
Resolution Foundation have tweeted a chart showing how the financial markets expect interest rates to rise extremely slowly -- which is why Mark Carney is signalling they may accelerate faster:
enltrLower for (even) longer. UK market expectations for Bank Rate have followed downward movements in US and euro-area expectations over recent months. Latest expectations imply Bank Rate will only break 1% by the middle of 2022; some 13 years after it last stood above this level pic.twitter.com/TC5VoWHPI3
 - Matt Whittaker (@MattWhittakerRF) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 1.51pm BST 
The press conference is now over, so here's a snap summary from CNBC's Joumanna Bercetche:
enltr #BankOfEngland : Reasons for upward growth revision this year : Q1 now 0.5% vs 0.3% in March: 1- better than expected US, Eurozone & China growth 2- stockpiling (adds ~0.1% qoq) 3- lower market interest rates and easier financial conditions
- Joumanna Bercetche (@CNBCJou) May 2, 2019
enltr #BankOfEngland : on            #brexit1-no mention at all of latest brexit extension impact 2- still see investment drag (-2.5%) this year on brexit uncertainty 3- expect data to remain volatile 4- projections still conditioned on "smooth adjustment to the av range of possible outcomes"
- Joumanna Bercetche (@CNBCJou) May 2, 2019
enltrIn response to @ChrisGiles_ question,            #Carney says "MPC are not more relaxed than usual about forecasts"... 2.1% , 2.2% is not consistent with inflation remit Presser more hawkish than QIR really emphasizing excess demand but not until a "year or so" says Broadbent            $GBP           #BOE
 - Joumanna Bercetche (@CNBCJou) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 1.36pm BST 
Q: What is your message ahead of next month's G20 meeting in Japan?
Mark Carney singles out the dangers of financial market fragmentation - he hopes to do more work to fight this.
He also implicitly criticises the US-China trade war, warning that new goods trade agreements won't solve the current imbalances within global trade.
block-time published-time 1.31pm BST 
Q: Where would your forecast be without the rise in consumer spending? And would you agree that without immigration and tough welfare rules, the economy would be flat?
Carney takes the first point, saying the economy was "bang in line" with the Bank's forecasts -- thanks to higher consumption. 
But you can't just strip that out...had consumers been less bullish, inflation would have been lower, so interest rates might have been different, and the whole picture would change.
block-time published-time 1.27pm BST 
Q: Are the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank now at the same point on monetary policy?
Errr no, Carney replies. Every economy, every central bank, every family is unique, but the BoE is facing a certain large issue (Brexit!) that will affect the economy in a certain way.
block-time published-time 1.24pm BST 
Back to Brexit...
Q: Your surveys shows that a quarter of UK firms still don't have a Brexit plan in place. Should they act now?
Mark Carney replies that firms expect a no-deal Brexit would knock their output by 3.5% on average.
He says small firms tend to be the ones without contingency plans. Some are "hoping for the best" on Brexit, while others simply can't prepare.
Deputy governor Ben Broadbent weight in too - pointing out that contingency plans are expensive, and stock-piling sucks up capital.
block-time published-time 1.15pm BST 
 Carney on the climate change threat  
Q: My colleague Larry Elliott asks about climate change -- shouldn't the Bank's monetary policy committee consider this issue?
Carney explains that the Bank's financial policy committee has been doing a lot of work on climate change -- because it's a long-term issue, that can threaten financial stability.
Parliaments' decision to declare a climate emergency yesterday backs up the FPC's work, he says.
That work includes looking at the future framework which companies work under. When policies to address climate change are tightened, financial institutions and the firms they fund need to be ready. 
Events of recent weeks have reinforced the need to be flexible to changes in climate policy, he says -- a hint that firms can't put their heads in the sand any more.
Carney then concedes that the MPC looks at short-term issues - its forecasts only cover the next few years. That's not ideal when you're looking at the looming threat of global warming [ which explains why climate change doesn't appear in the minutes of May's meeting ].
The governor says:
For us, we spend a lot of time focusing on what happens on the next few quarters and the next few years....
This was a point I tried to make a few years ago - the tragedy of the horizon is that when it becomes relevant for monetary policy it will be too late.
block-time published-time 1.06pm BST 
Q: What are the growth implications if Britain agreed a customs union with the EU?
Mark Carney explains that there are various sorts of customs union. The Bank's forecasts assume that Brexit will create a situation midway between an EEA-style agreement (close integration) and a move to WTO rules (less integration).
More integration would imply higher growth and investment in the short term, and possibly more inflation too.
Q: Would you welcome it?
Parliament must make a number of very large trade-offs when reaching agreement with the EU, including financial services access, Carney replies. 
One issue is whether the City becomes a rule-taker from Europe after Brexit (if it's forced to follow EU rules without helping to write them).
block-time published-time 12.59pm BST 
Q: You risk missing your gender diversity targets, so should the next Bank of England governor be a woman?
Mark Carney (flanked by three other men) insists that the Bank is making good progress on gender diversity. The number of women in senior management has risen from 17% in 2013 to over 31% today, and the pipeline of new employees is showing greater diversity on gender, and ethnicity.
Carney (who steps down in January) adds:
We're shifting the dial, without question.
My successor is a question for the government, he adds, declining to express a preference.
Several women are thought to be in the frame to succeed Carney:
 Related:  Chancellor hires diversity specialists to find new Bank governor
block-time published-time 12.54pm BST 
Q: What needs to happen to encourage businesses to invest, rather than just moaning?
Mark Carney suggests this is a bit unfair - firms are rightly cautious about making big investments 
More and more of them don't expect Brexit to be resolved by the end of this year, so they're unwilling to take big decisions.
block-time published-time 12.51pm BST 
 Amusingly, the City seems to be ignoring Mark Carney's hints that interest rates may rise faster than they expect. 
The pound is as flat and calm as a millpond, basically unchanged against the US dollar at $1.305.
Traders may remember that Carney gave an identical warning in 2015 -- only to leave rates at record lows, and then cut them after the EU referendum. 
block-time published-time 12.48pm BST 
Q: How can you say that the risk of a disorderly Brexit have eased?
Carney points out that MPs voted against a no-deal Brexit.
block-time published-time 12.47pm BST 
enltrTo paraphrase #Carney, markets underprice what the            #BoE expects to happen, which depends on the assumption of an orderly Brexit. The BoE implied rate curve may, therefore, be on the move coming months, boosting            #sterling.
- Bart Hordijk (@Bart___Hordijk) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 12.46pm BST 
 Carney: Markets under-estimating interest rate hikes  
Onto questions:
Q: Can you shed more light on the Bank's plans for interest rate rises in the next couple of years?
Governor Carney explains that the BoE expects to make further withdrawal of monetary stimulus.. which means more interest rate hikes.
And he then repeats his warning that the markets are under-estimating future interest rate hikes.
enltrCarney: potential for "more and more frequent interest rate rises than the market expects"
- Adam Parsons (@AdamParsons1) May 2, 2019
enltrBoE Governor Carney says there are insufficient hikes in the market curve $GBP
 - DailyFX Team Live (@DailyFXTeam) May 2, 2019
[Explanation: The Bank runs an economic model that estimates the cost of living against market expectations of future borrowing costs, to decide whether it needs to tighten faster, or slower, than the City expects].
block-time published-time 12.42pm BST 
 Mark Carney warns that investors may be under-estimating future UK interest rate rises. 
The current market interest rate curve is "unequal to the task" of achieving the Bank's inflation target, he says -- in other words, rates must rise faster, or inflation will overshoot.
The Bank expects to raise interest rates at a gradual rate, he adds.
block-time published-time 12.37pm BST 
 Mark Carney begins his press conference by explaining that global tensions have eased since the Bank of England's last Quarterly Inflation Report in February. 
Financial conditions have improved, global trade appears to be stabilising, and trade tensions may be abating, the governor explains.
But domestic tensions remain against this "benign" global backdrop, Carney continues -- a reference to Brexit.
Consumption has been stronger than expected, but business investment fell by 2% rather than growing by 4%. 
Britain faces the longest run of falling business investment in the post-war era, Carney says sternly, given the uncertainty over Britain's future relationship with the EU.
The number of firms with Brexit contingency plans in place has risen from a half in February, to around three quarters today. Many have been focused on stock-building, which has boosted growth in the last quarter.
But many firms still fear economic harm from a no-deal Brexit, Carney continues. And in the short term, firms have hired more staff rather than investing in expensive equipment. That's good for unemployment, and wage growth, but presumably bad for productivity.
block-time published-time 12.31pm BST 
Here's our news story on the Bank's interest rate decision:
 Related:  Bank of England holds interest rates and vows to restrict pace of rises
block-time published-time 12.30pm BST 
 Carney press conference begins  
Mark Carney is holding a press conference now to discuss the inflation report (and perhaps climate change too?). It's being streamed live here.
block-time published-time 12.27pm BST 
The Bank is also sticking to its pledge that interest rates will rise (but not today!) at a gradual pace.
enltrWe have kept interest rates at 0.75%. Find out why in our visual summary: https://t.co/NErJey2wDI           #InflationReport           pic.twitter.com/e66OrM3Owm
 - Bank of England (@bankofengland) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 12.21pm BST 
Brexit appears no fewer than 87 times in the Quarterly Inflation Report.
The Bank says Britain's struggle to leave the EU has hit business investment, driven up stockpiling, and deterred some people from moving house.
block-time published-time 12.14pm BST 
Disappointingly, the words 'climate change' don't seem to appear in the minutes of the Bank of England's meeting ( online here ), or in the Quarterly Inflation Report (            online here ).
I can't find 'green' and 'environmental' in their either, despite Mark Carney's apparent concern for the issue (and the damaging impact that the climate emergency could have on the economy). 
block-time published-time 12.07pm BST 
 The Bank of England has raised its growth forecast for the UK, now that the threat of an immediate no-deal Brexit has receded. 
It now expects Britain's GDP to grow by 1.5% this year, up from just 1.2% forecast in February.
In its interest rate statement the Bank says: 
GDP is expected to have grown by 0.5% in 2019 Q1, in part reflecting a larger-than-expected boost from companies in the United Kingdom and the European Union building stocks ahead of recent Brexit deadlines.
That boost is expected to be temporary, however, and quarterly growth is expected to slow to around 0.2% in Q2. Smoothing through those developments, the underlying pace of GDP growth appears to be slightly stronger than previously anticipated, but marginally below potential.
The Bank also warns that businesses are continuing to slash investment - which bodes badly for future growth (and indeed for climate-related projects)
That subdued pace reflects the impact of the slowdown in global growth and ongoing Brexit uncertainties. The latter is having a particularly pronounced impact on business investment, which has been falling for a year.
block-time published-time 12.04pm BST 
Here's a video clip confirming that some of the climate activists at Barclays were forcibly moved by security staff - even though the protest appeared entirely peaceful.
enltrThe moment #DivestBarclays campaigners attempted to protest            @Barclays AGM over their fossil fuel funding. Heavy handed security to say the least!            pic.twitter.com/83ptseT0t4
 - People & Planet (@peopleandplanet) May 2, 2019
enltrActivists from @peopleandplanet take the floor and ask            @Barclays CEO to tell the truth as he shamelessly promotes the bank's climate action. The truth? Barclays has been pouring over $85bn into            #fossilfuels since the            #ParisAgreement.            #FossilBanksNoThanks           #BarclaysAGM           pic.twitter.com/PBME59CQlz
 - Fossil Banks No Thanks (@NoFossilBanks) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 12.00pm BST 
 Bank of England interest rate decision  
 Newsflash: The Bank of England has left UK interest rates unchanged at 0.75%. 
It's a unanimous vote too; all nine policymakers judged it's too early to raise borrowing costs, given the current Brexit uncertainty
More to follow....
block-time published-time 11.52am BST 
 Barclays defends climate record  
 Barclays CEO Jes Staley has claimed that the bank does take climate change seriously. 
He told shareholders that the Bank wants to help the move to a low carbon economy, and gave several examples of this commitment:
    • £27bn of funding for social and environmental segments around the world last year, including issuing green bonds and renewable financing.
    • The first major UK bank to launch a green mortgage (to buy an energy efficient home)
    • A £118m loan to help build an 'Energy from Waste' Power Plant in Bedfordshire.
    • Green Agriculture loans to famers to buy new environmentally friendly plant and equipment.
    • Selling its controlling stake in Yorkshire fracking firm Third Energy
Staley adds that Barclays is also cleaning up its game, by refusing to financing oil or gas exploration in the Arctic, or greenfield thermal coal mining activity. 
He declares (to the echoes of climate protesters leaving the room):
 Put simply, Barclays fully understands our corporate responsibility in respect of climate change. We are a supporter of the goals of the Paris accord. And we will keep our policy position under constant review to ensure that our actions align with those goals.
But activists simply aren't convinced. Remember, it's been labelled the top European banker of fracking and coal.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.53am BST
block-time published-time 11.44am BST 
Today's protests have overshadowed activist investor Edward Bramson's attempt to win a seat on Barclay's board.
Bramson seems to have been unsuccessful, but won't give up his battle.
Kalyeena Makortoff reports:
Bramson made an appearance at the Barclays AGM in London on Thursday morning, conceding early defeat over his resolution to become a bank director.
"Before we start I think it's fair to tell you that we know we haven't got a majority of the vote." Instead, Bramson said he expects a "fairly heavy vote against" his resolution. "We've known it for a couple of weeks."
block-time published-time 11.44am BST 
Some Barclays shareholders applauded the climate protesters as they left the AGM - showing the City does have a degree of sympathy for their cause.
enltrThe group was eventually led out of the main hall, but received applause from the investor crowd as they left
- Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 11.37am BST 
Here's another video clip of the protests:
enltrClimate change protestors interrupt ceo Jes Staley ? @Barclays ? AGM ?            @BBCBusiness ?            pic.twitter.com/01hlmX62IX
 - Danielle Codd (@DanielleCodd) May 2, 2019
This article from March explains how Barclays is in the firing line for funding tens of billions of pounds of environmentally harmful projects:
 Related:  Barclays funds climate breakdown. We are determined to make it stop | Seema Syeda
block-time published-time 11.33am BST 
 Activists disrupt Barclays AGM  
Barclays annual meeting has just been disrupted by climate activists.
They've interrupted CEO Jes Staley's speech, and are calling on the bank to tell the truth about its role funding the fossil fuel industry.
enltrA group of climate protesters have linked arms and disrupted the Barclays AGM for another year running, yelling "climate justice" and "tell the truth" pic.twitter.com/AIOz5xlKhX
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) May 2, 2019
enltrClimate change protesters have infiltrated the Barclays AGM, interrupting chief executive Jes Staley's speech on the subject. pic.twitter.com/V0l8B0CHDu
 - Callum Keown (@CallumKeown1) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 11.32am BST 
Reuters is reporting that several of the protesters outside Barclays' AGM were "dragged away" by security staff and police. 
Here's its take:
Protesters called on Barclays to end its financing of fossil fuel projects outside the lender's annual investor meeting in London on Thursday,where shareholders were gathering to vote on a possible boardroom revamp.
Campaigners from student activist network People & Planet waved banners reading 'Fossil Banks-No Thanks', days after environmental group Extinction Rebellion paralysed parts of the British capital in protests against the impact of climate change.
Several protesters were dragged away from the venue at the QEII conference centre in Westminster by police and security.
  More here: Barclays targeted by climate change protest ahead of activist showdown
block-time published-time 11.17am BST 
 Back in the markets, shares in Dutch football club Ajax have hit a fresh all-time high this morning, after it put one foot in the Champion's League final. 
Ajax secured a 1-0 win over Tottenham Hotspur on Tuesday night -- something of an escape for an injury-ravaged and generally outplayed Spurs.
With markets closed yesterday, traders are now hailing Ajax's efforts, which leaves them odds-on to make European football's blue-riband event (but nothing's certain in football...)
Qualifying for the final is worth (EURO)15m, compared with (EURO)12m for crashing out in the semis. Win the Big Cup and you collect an extra (EURO)4m, plus extra sponsorship and merchandising rights -- and the prospect of lucrative transfer offers for your best players.
enltrAjax shares trading at all-time highs on hopes of reaching the Champions League finals against Barcelona and then selling all their star players to the Catalan side. $AJAX +90% over the past year            pic.twitter.com/9MLCCL5OBp
 - Jesse Cohen (@JesseCohenInv) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 10.56am BST 
My colleague Kalyeena Makortoff reports that some of the protesters outside Barclays AGM have hot-footed it from the Bank of England.
enltrClimate protesters gathered outside the Barclays AGM at Westminster this morning, some said they came straight from the Bank of England action earlier on pic.twitter.com/W7hlBZtWxB
 - Kalyeena Makortoff (@kalyeena) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 10.54am BST 
Barclays shareholders arriving at today's annual general meeting at the QE2 centre are being urged to press the bank to stop funding fossil fuel protests:
enltrThis is a #ClimateEmergency !            @Barclays must go            #FossilFree ??            pic.twitter.com/XLJG68qBGI
 - People & Planet (@peopleandplanet) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 10.35am BST 
The BBC's Danielle Codd is also outside the Barclays AGM:
enltrSmall climate change protest outside ? @Barclays ? AGM as investors enter...            pic.twitter.com/J6yP0qHjWt
 - Danielle Codd (@DanielleCodd) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 10.33am BST 
 Climate activists target Barclays AGM  
 Barclays Bank is also feeling the wrath of climate change activists. 
Protesters are demonstrating outside its Annual General Meeting in London this morning, urging it to stop investing in fossil fuel projects.
enltr. @NoFossilBanks protest at the            #Barclays           #AGM !            #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/Y9EP2Afee4
 - Sonia Hierzig (@soniahl91) May 2, 2019
A recent report found that Barclays was the worst offender in Europe when it comes to investing in environmentally harmful projects.
Since the Paris agreement was signed at the end of 2015, Barclays has reportedly provided $85bn of funding to the fossil fuel industry, from Britain's fracking industry to the Dakota Access pipeline in North America, and exploitation of Canada's tar sands.
enltr. @ShareAction has today together with investors with over $1trn assets written to            @Barclays - 'worst in Europe' for fossil fuel financing - calling on the bank to restrict its massive financing of            #tarsands and            #coal           #climateemergency
 - Louise Rouse (@rouselouise) May 1, 2019
block-time published-time 10.24am BST 
 Fossil Free London, who co-organised the protests, argues that the Bank of England needs to set a good example to the rest of the financial world. 
A spokesperson says:
"In signalling to the market that it is willing to invest in fossil fuels, the Bank is setting an example for other banks and investors to do the same. In giving its stamp of approval, the Bank of England is legitimising climate criminals.
"We are therefore demanding that the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee blacklist bonds from fossil fuel companies, and we call on them to instead buy assets in fossil free sectors, such as renewable energy."
Currently the Bank owns £10bn of debt issued by companies, as part of the stimulus measures taken after the 2016 Brexit vote. Nearly half of those bonds were issued by companies in high-carbon sectors, including the likes of BP and Shell ( who posted solid profits this morning ).
In theory, the BoE could boost the green economy by buying bonds from more environmentally conscious firms. This would lower their borrowing costs, and help the move towards greener technologies.
block-time published-time 10.12am BST 
 Activists: BoE complicit in climate crisis  
 Fran Boait,  executive director of Positive Money, is urging the Bank of England to use its powers to help fight the climate crisis. 
Speaking at this morning's protests, she says:
"As regulator of our financial system, the central bank has the power to stamp out risky fossil fuel lending, using the same macroprudential tools it has used to clamp down on irresponsible mortgage lending since the financial crisis."
"In choosing not to use these powers at its disposal, it is complicit in the climate crisis."
enltrBrilliant protest #GreenTheBoE           #ClimateEmergencyNOW with            @PositiveMoneyUK           @FossilFree_UK we need more action now            pic.twitter.com/JysMbtliym
 - Fran Boait (@franboait) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 10.10am BST 
Today's protests at the Bank of England come as the government's official advisers argues that the UK must set a legally binding target of zero net carbon emissions by 2050. 
The Committee on Climate Change says tough,and pricy action is needed. Moving to a low-carbon economy will cost tens of billions of pounds of investment every year, to drive the move to clean energy production.
But that's a lot cheaper than the cost of inaction.
On a personal level, that would mean the end of petrol and diesel cars, ditching gas boilers, eating less meat, and taking rather fewer flights.
Here's our news story on the CCC's recommendation:
 Related:  'Do it now': UK must set zero-carbon target for 2050, say official advisers
Climate activist Professor Mark Maslin argues that the UK needs to move faster:
enltrClimate Change Committee declare UK must have a zero carbon target - but bad news is they suggest by 2050. Britain must adopt a 2030 zero-carbon target - giving us 10 years to enact win-win solutions reducing carbon, saving money and make Britain a better, cleaner place to live. pic.twitter.com/4apVwVvmck
 - Mark Maslin (@ProfMarkMaslin) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 9.52am BST 
Back outside the Bank of England....
enltrJessie from Fossil Free London is demanding the @bankofengland and mark carney put their money where their mouth is and get out of fossil fuels. We need more than strong worlds. We need action. We need to            #GreenTheBoE           pic.twitter.com/uc9E6E9jz5
 - Fossil Free London (@divestlondon) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 9.37am BST 
 Another economic newsflash: the UK construction sector has returned to growth, but still looks weak. 
Housebuilding activity rose in April, according to data firm Markit, lifting the Construction PMI index up to 50.5 from 49.7 (anything over 50 shows growth).
But commercial housebuilding, and big civil construction projects, shrunk again -- news that might deter the Bank of England from considering raising interest rates anytime soon.
block-time published-time 9.29am BST 
On the economic front, eurozone factories have suffered their third contraction in a row, as the US-China trade war, Brexit and weak global growth all bite.
enltrEurozone manufacturing PMI of 47.9 in April, basically unchanged from the flash estimate. Germany & Italy both with sub-50 readings, with France bang on 50. Rough indicator of official stats. Markit citing protectionism, auto sector issues & Brexit as influences. pic.twitter.com/UChtWzjTQ5
 - Rupert Seggins (@Rupert_Seggins) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 9.27am BST 
 A petition has been set up to urge the Bank of England to raise its game on climate change. 
It calls on Britain's central bank to:
    • Use your power to create money to decarbonise our economy, rather than strengthening the fossil fuel industry
    • Introduce tougher regulation to actively penalise high-carbon lending while encouraging investment towards a low-carbon transition
You can sign it  here .
Share Action, which campaigns for better corporate behaviour, is backing it:
enltrCapital markets have huge potential to halt climate breakdown. The Bank of England has the power to unleash green investment on a massive scale. Sign the petition ( https://t.co/gZ8rFRvfyr ) and join            @PositiveMoneyUK & @FossilFreeLondon on Thursday to            #GreenTheBoE
 - ShareAction (@ShareAction) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 9.22am BST 
 The long-running Brexit crisis may distract the Bank of England from the climate change emergency. 
Associate Press points out that the BoE's new forecasts, due at noon, will be closely scrutinised.
 The Bank of England is set to provide its first forecasts of what Britain's Brexit delay will mean for the British economy. 
The central bank is due Thursday to keep its main interest rate on hold at 0.75 percent following the latest meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
The focus will be what Governor Mark Carney says about the Brexit extension granted by the other 27 members of the European Union. 
Britain was due to leave the EU on March 29 but Parliament twice rejected Prime Minister Theresa May's Brexit deal, pushing back the Brexit date to Oct. 31. 
The central bank has consistently warned about the economic impact of Brexit uncertainty and of a deep recession if Britain were to leave the EU without a deal. 
block-time published-time 9.09am BST 
Here's another video clip from outside the Bank:
enltr"Bank of England, can't you see, money must go #FossilFree !"            #ChangeFinance           pic.twitter.com/OkTev5a39S
 - Robin Hood (@RobinHoodTaxUK) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 8.59am BST 
 The Bank of England argues that it does take the climate change threat seriously already. 
It has created a Climate Financial Risk Forum, in which the biggest companies in the City meet to discuss the financial risk presented by the issue. 
After all, the best way to focus City minds on ANY issue is to warn it might cost them some money.
Last month, Carney and Bank of France governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau issued a joint warning that the climate crisis could cause a slump in asset prices.
They pointed out: 
The catastrophic effects of climate change are already visible around the world. From blistering heatwaves in North America to typhoons in south-east Asia and droughts in Africa and Australia, no country or community is immune. These events damage infrastructure and private property, negatively affect health, decrease productivity and destroy wealth.
And they are extremely costly: insured losses have risen five-fold in the past three decades. The enormous human and financial costs of climate change are having a devastating effect on our collective wellbeing.
But such talk is, of course, cheaper than  actually  taking serious steps to move to a low-carbon economy.
block-time published-time 8.52am BST 
enltrWe've got a clear message for the @bankofengland and Mark Carney. It's time stop funding climate breakdown and starting funding a green transitions. This is an emergency. Time to act like it.            @peopleandplanet           @FossilFree_UK           @ukycc           @Strike4Youth           @ExtinctionR           pic.twitter.com/8OPmfGhlWO
 - Fossil Free London (@divestlondon) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 8.50am BST 
This video clip shows an activist chanting "This is an emergency... Bank of England go fossil free".
undltr #GreenTheBoE now!            https://t.co/PULsbeyMNi
 - Positive Money (@PositiveMoneyUK) May 2, 2019
block-time published-time 8.46am BST 
 Protests begin  
 The protests are underway outside the Bank of England, as activists hammer home their message at Bank staff, and commuters passing by. 
[If you're not familiar with London, the BoE is next to Bank Station, in the heart of the City of London]
Journalists should be arriving soon too, for the lock-in ahead of the interest rate decision at noon.
enltrWe're outside the Bank of England demanding Mark Carney put his mouth where his mouth is & #GreenTheBoE now!            pic.twitter.com/AAhQqQo6HK
 - Positive Money (@PositiveMoneyUK) May 2, 2019
enltrMark Carney go fossil free! Get carbon out of the BoE! @divestlondon           @ExtinctionR           @Strike4Youth           #GreenTheBoE now!            pic.twitter.com/nFTIND8Uhl
 - Positive Money (@PositiveMoneyUK) May 2, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.22am BST
block-time published-time 8.43am BST 
     Filled oil drums are seen at Royal Dutch Shell Plc's lubricants blending plant in the town of Torzhok, Russia Photograph: Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters   
Digging fossil fuels out of the ground and burning them is obviously bad for the environment, pumping up carbon emissions, adding to global warming and undermining the Paris Agreement targets.
 But it's also extremely lucrative. 
Just this morning, oil giant Royal Dutch Shell has posted profits of £4.1bn for the last three months, as it shrugs off weaker oil prices. That's better than the City expected.
That, by my maths, is over £31,000 per minute (or more than the average UK annual wage).
Shareholders get the benefits, receiving £3bn of dividends in the last quarter. Shell's shares have jumped 1.5% in early trading too.
block-time published-time 8.15am BST 
Labour's shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, is backing the protesters:
enltrRight now, big finance is driving climate breakdown. The Bank of England has a key role to play in tackling climate change.The debate has started on how to use the power of the bank to unleash green investment. Join @PositiveMoneyUK & @FossilFreeLondon on Thursday to            #GreenTheBoE
 - John McDonnell MP (@johnmcdonnellMP) May 1, 2019
block-time published-time 8.09am BST 
 The climate change protesters should have a spring in their steps as they head to the Bank this morning. 
Last night, the UK parliament approved a motion to declare an environment and climate emergency. This move follows the Extinction Rebellion protests in London this month, and the school strikes organised by pupils.
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn summed up the mood in parliament, declaring:
"We pledge to work as closely as possible with countries that are serious about ending the climate catastrophe and make clear to Donald Trump that he cannot ignore international agreements and action on the climate crisis."
 Related:  MPs endorse Corbyn's call to declare climate emergency
After months of Brexit deadlock, it's a relief to see MPs focusing on other major issues (although this motion won't legally compel the government to act).
As Swedish teenage activist Greta Thunberg points out, protests can have a real impact -  so over to you, Mark Carney.....
enltrActivism works. So act.
- Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) April 29, 2019
block-time published-time 7.52am BST 
The Bank of England needs to blacklist high-carbon bonds and commit its huge buying power to 'green QE', writes Simon Youel of Positive Money.
In a Guardian column today, he explains:
In the three years since the Paris climate agreement, as the government has spoken (often empty words) about doing its part in lowering emissions, our financial sector has been pouring hundreds of billions of pounds into fossil-fuel projects, unleashing environmental havoc across the planet.
In its role as the regulator of the financial system, the Bank of England has the power to stamp out irresponsible fossil fuel lending - using the same tools it has used to clamp down on risky mortgage lending since the financial crisis. In choosing not to use these powers, it is complicit in the climate crisis.
 Related:  Why I will be protesting against Mark Carney on Thursday | Simon Youel
block-time published-time 7.50am BST 
 What the protesters want  
 Today's protests at Bank are organised by two campaign groups - Positive Money and            Fossil Free London.  
They want the Bank to take two specific steps to address the climate.
1) To 'green' its bond-buying quantitative easing programme, which currently buys UK government debt and some corporate bonds.
The campaigners say:
At the very least ruling out asset purchases in high-carbon sectors, if not actively favouring bonds which finance green projects. 
2) The Bank should use its influence to support lending to environmentally sustainable groups, rathe than dirty industries.
They say:
The Bank of England should use all of the powers at its disposal to stop financial firms it regulates pouring more money into fossil fuels, while encouraging greater lending towards more sustainable ends. This approach, known as 'credit guidance', could include tools such as differential collateral requirements and targeted refinancing operations. 
block-time published-time 7.37am BST 
 Climate change protests ahead of BoE rate decision     The Bank of England in the City of London. Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters   
 Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. 
The Bank of England is centre-stage today as it sets interest rates for the first time since Brexit was delayed until the autumn.
With political uncertainty still rife, Bank policymakers will surely leave borrowing costs unchanged at 0.75% -- although hawkish members of the Monetary Policy Committee could lean towards a hike.
The Bank will also publish its latest assessment of the UK economy, via its Inflation Report. This will show whether the fog of Brexit uncertainty is hitting growth and the cost of living.
But... governor Mark Carney and colleagues will also be challenged on a bigger issue than interest rates - the climate emergency, and its threat to the planet and human life.
Climate change activists are heading to the Bank as I type, to demand bolder action from the central bank.
enltrTomorrow morning we and @divestlondon will be outside the Bank of England calling for greater action against banks pouring hundreds of billions of pounds into fossil fuels. To            #TellTheTruth, we're facing a            #ClimateEmergency, and it's time to            #GreenTheBoE           https://t.co/T8wY5ESZQd           pic.twitter.com/yDA5mlCcqn
 - Positive Money (@PositiveMoneyUK) May 1, 2019
BoE staff arriving for work will be greeted with banners and signs calling on the Bank of England to 'put your money where your mouth is''. Once inside, they'll be able to hear chants including "Green QE, not Shell BP / if you print money, go fossil free". 
Carney has embraced the issue in the past, warning bank bosses that they must play a key role in tackling global warming - rather than blithely lending to fossil fuel producers. But clearly he, and the Bank, are under pressure to do more.
 Related:  Mark Carney tells global banks they cannot ignore climate change dangers
  Also coming up today 
The latest monthly survey of British construction is expected to show a modest return to growth last month, following a contraction in March.
But the latest healthcheck on Europe's factories may be bleaker. Economists expect the eurozone factory PMI (delayed by May Day yesterday) will keep languishing at just 47.8, which would signal a contraction.
 The agenda 
    • 8.30am BST: Climate change protests outside the Bank of England
    • 9am BST: Eurozone factory PMI for April
    • 9.30am BST: UK construction PMI for April
    • 12pm BST: Bank of England interest rate decision
    • 12.30pm BST: BoE governor Mark Carney holds press conference
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.07am BST
 5070 2019-05-05T06:45:00Z true 2019-05-02T06:38:54Z false false 2019-05-02T14:57:11Z true UK theguardian.com 
https://gu.com/p/bctgx false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/3f28c5b634ffdd8de44606052735b1d9508c7418/0_247_2064_1238/500.jpg false en Time for a recap: Activists have challenged the City of London to do more to tackle the climate emergency, but Brexit is still higher up the agenda. Protesters descended on the Bank of England today, to urge governor Mark Carney and colleagues to use their regulatory powers to rein in lending to fossil fuel industries They also want the Bank to use its QE stimulus package to support green companies, not those responsible for carbon emissions. Here's some video from the event. Speaking after the protest, Fran Boait of Positive Money warned that the Bank was "complicit in the climate crisis". Carney, though, says the Bank's Financial Policy Committee has been taking a lead, encouraging City firms to face the crisis. He said financial firms must be flexible to changes in policy, as MPs yesterday backed calls to declare a climate emergency. Speaking after the Bank of England left interest rates unchanged, Britain's top central banker warned that Brexit uncertainty was still weighing on business investment. But....he also raised the Bank's growth forecasts, and hinted strongly that interest rates could rise faster than the meagre one rate hike expected by markets. Protesters also targeted Barclays Bank, which is one of the worse offenders for funding the fossil fuel industry. They demonstrated outside, and even disrupted CEO Jes Staley's speech to shareholders. It was a mixed day for Barclays -- they managed to repel activist investor Edward Bramson's bid for a board seat, but also suffered a backlash over executive pay. Mark Carney's key message today is that interest rates will probably rise faster than investors think, says our economics editor Larry Elliott. Investment has fallen for four successive quarters, trade has been a drag on growth and the economy has become even more dependent on the willingness of households to carry on spending. Investment is expected to bounce back once Brexit has been resolved, while low unemployment and rising real incomes will continue to support household spending. In those circumstances, the MPC is likely to become markedly more hawkish. Newsflash: Barclays has suffered a pay revolt, hot on the heels of the climate change protests at its AGM today. 30% of shareholders opposed the bank's remuneration report, a slapdown for CEO Jes Staley and colleagues. Some reaction to the Tesla fund-raising drive: In other environmental-business news, Tesla launched a new $2.3bn fundraising drive. It is raising the cash by issuing new shares and debt. CEO Elon Musk is chipping in $10m personally, following pressure from Wall Street to bolster Tesla's cash reserves. Tesla needs the money to fund its ongoing expansion plans and hit the production targets. This would quieten sceptics who don't believe Musk will revolutionise the car industry with Tesla's range of electric, self-driving cars. Reuters explains: Analysts have been predicting for months that Tesla would need to raise funds for its expansion plans, which include the construction of a factory in Shanghai, the upcoming Model Y SUV, and the crucial ramp up of Model 3 sedan production. Shares in Tesla have jumped by 3.75% in early trading, to $242.78. Russ Mould, AJ Bell Investment Director, warned last week that Tesla was facing a cash crunch: The immediate pressure may be off, now that Tesla has repaid $1.1 billion in convertible bonds that matured in November and March, but Elon Musk and his colleagues face another $566 million repayment this coming November, even as the company continues to consume cash rather than generate it." "The debate over whether the firm needs to raise fresh capital is therefore not going to go away. Given the loyal band of shareholders he has and the company's massive market capitalisation it would make sense for Mr Musk to do so. Musk has clearly come to the same conclusion, having seen Tesla's cash pile dip last quarter: Just in: photos of climate change protesters being dragged away by security outside Barclays annual investor meeting in London this morning. Resolution Foundation have tweeted a chart showing how the financial markets expect interest rates to rise extremely slowly -- which is why Mark Carney is signalling they may accelerate faster: The press conference is now over, so here's a snap summary from CNBC's Joumanna Bercetche: Q: What is your message ahead of next month's G20 meeting in Japan? Mark Carney singles out the dangers of financial market fragmentation - he hopes to do more work to fight this. He also implicitly criticises the US-China trade war, warning that new goods trade agreements won't solve the current imbalances within global trade. Q: Where would your forecast be without the rise in consumer spending? And would you agree that without immigration and tough welfare rules, the economy would be flat? Carney takes the first point, saying the economy was "bang in line" with the Bank's forecasts -- thanks to higher consumption. But you can't just strip that out...had consumers been less bullish, inflation would have been lower, so interest rates might have been different, and the whole picture would change. Q: Are the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank now at the same point on monetary policy? Errr no, Carney replies. Every economy, every central bank, every family is unique, but the BoE is facing a certain large issue (Brexit!) that will affect the economy in a certain way. Back to Brexit... Q: Your surveys shows that a quarter of UK firms still don't have a Brexit plan in place. Should they act now? Mark Carney replies that firms expect a no-deal Brexit would knock their output by 3.5% on average. He says small firms tend to be the ones without contingency plans. Some are "hoping for the best" on Brexit, while others simply can't prepare. Deputy governor Ben Broadbent weight in too - pointing out that contingency plans are expensive, and stock-piling sucks up capital. Q: My colleague Larry Elliott asks about climate change -- shouldn't the Bank's monetary policy committee consider this issue? Carney explains that the Bank's financial policy committee has been doing a lot of work on climate change -- because it's a long-term issue, that can threaten financial stability. Parliaments' decision to declare a climate emergency yesterday backs up the FPC's work, he says. That work includes looking at the future framework which companies work under. When policies to address climate change are tightened, financial institutions and the firms they fund need to be ready. Events of recent weeks have reinforced the need to be flexible to changes in climate policy, he says -- a hint that firms can't put their heads in the sand any more. Carney then concedes that the MPC looks at short-term issues - its forecasts only cover the next few years. That's not ideal when you're looking at the looming threat of global warming [which explains why climate change doesn't appear in the minutes of May's meeting]. The governor says: For us, we spend a lot of time focusing on what happens on the next few quarters and the next few years.... This was a point I tried to make a few years ago - the tragedy of the horizon is that when it becomes relevant for monetary policy it will be too late. Q: What are the growth implications if Britain agreed a customs union with the EU? Mark Carney explains that there are various sorts of customs union. The Bank's forecasts assume that Brexit will create a situation midway between an EEA-style agreement (close integration) and a move to WTO rules (less integration). More integration would imply higher growth and investment in the short term, and possibly more inflation too. Q: Would you welcome it? Parliament must make a number of very large trade-offs when reaching agreement with the EU, including financial services access, Carney replies. One issue is whether the City becomes a rule-taker from Europe after Brexit (if it's forced to follow EU rules without helping to write them). Q: You risk missing your gender diversity targets, so should the next Bank of England governor be a woman? Mark Carney (flanked by three other men) insists that the Bank is making good progress on gender diversity. The number of women in senior management has risen from 17% in 2013 to over 31% today, and the pipeline of new employees is showing greater diversity on gender, and ethnicity. Carney (who steps down in January) adds: We're shifting the dial, without question. My successor is a question for the government, he adds, declining to express a preference. Several women are thought to be in the frame to succeed Carney: Q: What needs to happen to encourage businesses to invest, rather than just moaning? Mark Carney suggests this is a bit unfair - firms are rightly cautious about making big investments More and more of them don't expect Brexit to be resolved by the end of this year, so they're unwilling to take big decisions. Amusingly, the City seems to be ignoring Mark Carney's hints that interest rates may rise faster than they expect. The pound is as flat and calm as a millpond, basically unchanged against the US dollar at $1.305. Traders may remember that Carney gave an identical warning in 2015 -- only to leave rates at record lows, and then cut them after the EU referendum. Q: How can you say that the risk of a disorderly Brexit have eased? Carney points out that MPs voted against a no-deal Brexit. Onto questions: Q: Can you shed more light on the Bank's plans for interest rate rises in the next couple of years? Governor Carney explains that the BoE expects to make further withdrawal of monetary stimulus.. which means more interest rate hikes. And he then repeats his warning that the markets are under-estimating future interest rate hikes. [Explanation: The Bank runs an economic model that estimates the cost of living against market expectations of future borrowing costs, to decide whether it needs to tighten faster, or slower, than the City expects]. Mark Carney warns that investors may be under-estimating future UK interest rate rises. The current market interest rate curve is "unequal to the task" of achieving the Bank's inflation target, he says -- in other words, rates must rise faster, or inflation will overshoot. The Bank expects to raise interest rates at a gradual rate, he adds. Mark Carney begins his press conference by explaining that global tensions have eased since the Bank of England's last Quarterly Inflation Report in February. Financial conditions have improved, global trade appears to be stabilising, and trade tensions may be abating, the governor explains. But domestic tensions remain against this "benign" global backdrop, Carney continues -- a reference to Brexit. Consumption has been stronger than expected, but business investment fell by 2% rather than growing by 4%. Britain faces the longest run of falling business investment in the post-war era, Carney says sternly, given the uncertainty over Britain's future relationship with the EU. The number of firms with Brexit contingency plans in place has risen from a half in February, to around three quarters today. Many have been focused on stock-building, which has boosted growth in the last quarter. But many firms still fear economic harm from a no-deal Brexit, Carney continues. And in the short term, firms have hired more staff rather than investing in expensive equipment. That's good for unemployment, and wage growth, but presumably bad for productivity. Here's our news story on the Bank's interest rate decision: Mark Carney is holding a press conference now to discuss the inflation report (and perhaps climate change too?). It's being streamed live here. The Bank is also sticking to its pledge that interest rates will rise (but not today!) at a gradual pace. Brexit appears no fewer than 87 times in the Quarterly Inflation Report. The Bank says Britain's struggle to leave the EU has hit business investment, driven up stockpiling, and deterred some people from moving house. Disappointingly, the words 'climate change' don't seem to appear in the minutes of the Bank of England's meeting (online here), or in the Quarterly Inflation Report (online here). I can't find 'green' and 'environmental' in their either, despite Mark Carney's apparent concern for the issue (and the damaging impact that the climate emergency could have on the economy). The Bank of England has raised its growth forecast for the UK, now that the threat of an immediate no-deal Brexit has receded. It now expects Britain's GDP to grow by 1.5% this year, up from just 1.2% forecast in February. In its interest rate statement the Bank says: GDP is expected to have grown by 0.5% in 2019 Q1, in part reflecting a larger-than-expected boost from companies in the United Kingdom and the European Union building stocks ahead of recent Brexit deadlines. That boost is expected to be temporary, however, and quarterly growth is expected to slow to around 0.2% in Q2. Smoothing through those developments, the underlying pace of GDP growth appears to be slightly stronger than previously anticipated, but marginally below potential. The Bank also warns that businesses are continuing to slash investment - which bodes badly for future growth (and indeed for climate-related projects) That subdued pace reflects the impact of the slowdown in global growth and ongoing Brexit uncertainties. The latter is having a particularly pronounced impact on business investment, which has been falling for a year. Here's a video clip confirming that some of the climate activists at Barclays were forcibly moved by security staff - even though the protest appeared entirely peaceful. Newsflash: The Bank of England has left UK interest rates unchanged at 0.75%. It's a unanimous vote too; all nine policymakers judged it's too early to raise borrowing costs, given the current Brexit uncertainty More to follow.... Barclays CEO Jes Staley has claimed that the bank does take climate change seriously. He told shareholders that the Bank wants to help the move to a low carbon economy, and gave several examples of this commitment: £27bn of funding for social and environmental segments around the world last year, including issuing green bonds and renewable financing. The first major UK bank to launch a green mortgage (to buy an energy efficient home) A £118m loan to help build an 'Energy from Waste' Power Plant in Bedfordshire. Green Agriculture loans to famers to buy new environmentally friendly plant and equipment. Selling its controlling stake in Yorkshire fracking firm Third Energy Staley adds that Barclays is also cleaning up its game, by refusing to financing oil or gas exploration in the Arctic, or greenfield thermal coal mining activity. He declares (to the echoes of climate protesters leaving the room): Put simply, Barclays fully understands our corporate responsibility in respect of climate change. We are a supporter of the goals of the Paris accord. And we will keep our policy position under constant review to ensure that our actions align with those goals. But activists simply aren't convinced. Remember, it's been labelled the top European banker of fracking and coal. Today's protests have overshadowed activist investor Edward Bramson's attempt to win a seat on Barclay's board. Bramson seems to have been unsuccessful, but won't give up his battle. Kalyeena Makortoff reports: Bramson made an appearance at the Barclays AGM in London on Thursday morning, conceding early defeat over his resolution to become a bank director. "Before we start I think it's fair to tell you that we know we haven't got a majority of the vote." Instead, Bramson said he expects a "fairly heavy vote against" his resolution. "We've known it for a couple of weeks." Some Barclays shareholders applauded the climate protesters as they left the AGM - showing the City does have a degree of sympathy for their cause. Here's another video clip of the protests: This article from March explains how Barclays is in the firing line for funding tens of billions of pounds of environmentally harmful projects: Barclays annual meeting has just been disrupted by climate activists. They've interrupted CEO Jes Staley's speech, and are calling on the bank to tell the truth about its role funding the fossil fuel industry. Reuters is reporting that several of the protesters outside Barclays' AGM were "dragged away" by security staff and police. Here's its take: Protesters called on Barclays to end its financing of fossil fuel projects outside the lender's annual investor meeting in London on Thursday,where shareholders were gathering to vote on a possible boardroom revamp. Campaigners from student activist network People & Planet waved banners reading 'Fossil Banks-No Thanks', days after environmental group Extinction Rebellion paralysed parts of the British capital in protests against the impact of climate change. Several protesters were dragged away from the venue at the QEII conference centre in Westminster by police and security. More here: Barclays targeted by climate change protest ahead of activist showdown Back in the markets, shares in Dutch football club Ajax have hit a fresh all-time high this morning, after it put one foot in the Champion's League final. Ajax secured a 1-0 win over Tottenham Hotspur on Tuesday night -- something of an escape for an injury-ravaged and generally outplayed Spurs. With markets closed yesterday, traders are now hailing Ajax's efforts, which leaves them odds-on to make European football's blue-riband event (but nothing's certain in football...) Qualifying for the final is worth (EURO)15m, compared with (EURO)12m for crashing out in the semis. Win the Big Cup and you collect an extra (EURO)4m, plus extra sponsorship and merchandising rights -- and the prospect of lucrative transfer offers for your best players. My colleague Kalyeena Makortoff reports that some of the protesters outside Barclays AGM have hot-footed it from the Bank of England. Barclays shareholders arriving at today's annual general meeting at the QE2 centre are being urged to press the bank to stop funding fossil fuel protests: The BBC's Danielle Codd is also outside the Barclays AGM: Barclays Bank is also feeling the wrath of climate change activists. Protesters are demonstrating outside its Annual General Meeting in London this morning, urging it to stop investing in fossil fuel projects. A recent report found that Barclays was the worst offender in Europe when it comes to investing in environmentally harmful projects. Since the Paris agreement was signed at the end of 2015, Barclays has reportedly provided $85bn of funding to the fossil fuel industry, from Britain's fracking industry to the Dakota Access pipeline in North America, and exploitation of Canada's tar sands. Fossil Free London, who co-organised the protests, argues that the Bank of England needs to set a good example to the rest of the financial world. A spokesperson says: "In signalling to the market that it is willing to invest in fossil fuels, the Bank is setting an example for other banks and investors to do the same. In giving its stamp of approval, the Bank of England is legitimising climate criminals. "We are therefore demanding that the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee blacklist bonds from fossil fuel companies, and we call on them to instead buy assets in fossil free sectors, such as renewable energy." Currently the Bank owns £10bn of debt issued by companies, as part of the stimulus measures taken after the 2016 Brexit vote. Nearly half of those bonds were issued by companies in high-carbon sectors, including the likes of BP and Shell (who posted solid profits this morning). In theory, the BoE could boost the green economy by buying bonds from more environmentally conscious firms. This would lower their borrowing costs, and help the move towards greener technologies. Fran Boait, executive director of Positive Money, is urging the Bank of England to use its powers to help fight the climate crisis. Speaking at this morning's protests, she says: "As regulator of our financial system, the central bank has the power to stamp out risky fossil fuel lending, using the same macroprudential tools it has used to clamp down on irresponsible mortgage lending since the financial crisis." "In choosing not to use these powers at its disposal, it is complicit in the climate crisis." Today's protests at the Bank of England come as the government's official advisers argues that the UK must set a legally binding target of zero net carbon emissions by 2050. The Committee on Climate Change says tough,and pricy action is needed. Moving to a low-carbon economy will cost tens of billions of pounds of investment every year, to drive the move to clean energy production. But that's a lot cheaper than the cost of inaction. On a personal level, that would mean the end of petrol and diesel cars, ditching gas boilers, eating less meat, and taking rather fewer flights. Here's our news story on the CCC's recommendation: Climate activist Professor Mark Maslin argues that the UK needs to move faster: Back outside the Bank of England.... Another economic newsflash: the UK construction sector has returned to growth, but still looks weak. Housebuilding activity rose in April, according to data firm Markit, lifting the Construction PMI index up to 50.5 from 49.7 (anything over 50 shows growth). But commercial housebuilding, and big civil construction projects, shrunk again -- news that might deter the Bank of England from considering raising interest rates anytime soon. On the economic front, eurozone factories have suffered their third contraction in a row, as the US-China trade war, Brexit and weak global growth all bite. A petition has been set up to urge the Bank of England to raise its game on climate change. It calls on Britain's central bank to: Use your power to create money to decarbonise our economy, rather than strengthening the fossil fuel industry Introduce tougher regulation to actively penalise high-carbon lending while encouraging investment towards a low-carbon transition You can sign it here. Share Action, which campaigns for better corporate behaviour, is backing it: The long-running Brexit crisis may distract the Bank of England from the climate change emergency. Associate Press points out that the BoE's new forecasts, due at noon, will be closely scrutinised. The Bank of England is set to provide its first forecasts of what Britain's Brexit delay will mean for the British economy. The central bank is due Thursday to keep its main interest rate on hold at 0.75 percent following the latest meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee. The focus will be what Governor Mark Carney says about the Brexit extension granted by the other 27 members of the European Union. Britain was due to leave the EU on March 29 but Parliament twice rejected Prime Minister Theresa May's Brexit deal, pushing back the Brexit date to Oct. 31. The central bank has consistently warned about the economic impact of Brexit uncertainty and of a deep recession if Britain were to leave the EU without a deal. Here's another video clip from outside the Bank: The Bank of England argues that it does take the climate change threat seriously already. It has created a Climate Financial Risk Forum, in which the biggest companies in the City meet to discuss the financial risk presented by the issue. After all, the best way to focus City minds on ANY issue is to warn it might cost them some money. Last month, Carney and Bank of France governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau issued a joint warning that the climate crisis could cause a slump in asset prices. They pointed out: The catastrophic effects of climate change are already visible around the world. From blistering heatwaves in North America to typhoons in south-east Asia and droughts in Africa and Australia, no country or community is immune. These events damage infrastructure and private property, negatively affect health, decrease productivity and destroy wealth. And they are extremely costly: insured losses have risen five-fold in the past three decades. The enormous human and financial costs of climate change are having a devastating effect on our collective wellbeing. But such talk is, of course, cheaper than actually taking serious steps to move to a low-carbon economy. This video clip shows an activist chanting "This is an emergency... Bank of England go fossil free". The protests are underway outside the Bank of England, as activists hammer home their message at Bank staff, and commuters passing by. [If you're not familiar with London, the BoE is next to Bank Station, in the heart of the City of London] Journalists should be arriving soon too, for the lock-in ahead of the interest rate decision at noon. Digging fossil fuels out of the ground and burning them is obviously bad for the environment, pumping up carbon emissions, adding to global warming and undermining the Paris Agreement targets. But it's also extremely lucrative. Just this morning, oil giant Royal Dutch Shell has posted profits of £4.1bn for the last three months, as it shrugs off weaker oil prices. That's better than the City expected. That, by my maths, is over £31,000 per minute (or more than the average UK annual wage). Shareholders get the benefits, receiving £3bn of dividends in the last quarter. Shell's shares have jumped 1.5% in early trading too. Labour's shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, is backing the protesters: The climate change protesters should have a spring in their steps as they head to the Bank this morning. Last night, the UK parliament approved a motion to declare an environment and climate emergency. This move follows the Extinction Rebellion protests in London this month, and the school strikes organised by pupils. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn summed up the mood in parliament, declaring: "We pledge to work as closely as possible with countries that are serious about ending the climate catastrophe and make clear to Donald Trump that he cannot ignore international agreements and action on the climate crisis." After months of Brexit deadlock, it's a relief to see MPs focusing on other major issues (although this motion won't legally compel the government to act). As Swedish teenage activist Greta Thunberg points out, protests can have a real impact - so over to you, Mark Carney..... The Bank of England needs to blacklist high-carbon bonds and commit its huge buying power to 'green QE', writes Simon Youel of Positive Money. In a Guardian column today, he explains: In the three years since the Paris climate agreement, as the government has spoken (often empty words) about doing its part in lowering emissions, our financial sector has been pouring hundreds of billions of pounds into fossil-fuel projects, unleashing environmental havoc across the planet. In its role as the regulator of the financial system, the Bank of England has the power to stamp out irresponsible fossil fuel lending - using the same tools it has used to clamp down on risky mortgage lending since the financial crisis. In choosing not to use these powers, it is complicit in the climate crisis. Today's protests at Bank are organised by two campaign groups - Positive Money and Fossil Free London. They want the Bank to take two specific steps to address the climate. 1) To 'green' its bond-buying quantitative easing programme, which currently buys UK government debt and some corporate bonds. The campaigners say: At the very least ruling out asset purchases in high-carbon sectors, if not actively favouring bonds which finance green projects. 2) The Bank should use its influence to support lending to environmentally sustainable groups, rathe than dirty industries. They say: The Bank of England should use all of the powers at its disposal to stop financial firms it regulates pouring more money into fossil fuels, while encouraging greater lending towards more sustainable ends. This approach, known as 'credit guidance', could include tools such as differential collateral requirements and targeted refinancing operations. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The Bank of England is centre-stage today as it sets interest rates for the first time since Brexit was delayed until the autumn. With political uncertainty still rife, Bank policymakers will surely leave borrowing costs unchanged at 0.75% -- although hawkish members of the Monetary Policy Committee could lean towards a hike. The Bank will also publish its latest assessment of the UK economy, via its Inflation Report. This will show whether the fog of Brexit uncertainty is hitting growth and the cost of living. But... governor Mark Carney and colleagues will also be challenged on a bigger issue than interest rates - the climate emergency, and its threat to the planet and human life. Climate change activists are heading to the Bank as I type, to demand bolder action from the central bank. BoE staff arriving for work will be greeted with banners and signs calling on the Bank of England to 'put your money where your mouth is''. Once inside, they'll be able to hear chants including "Green QE, not Shell BP / if you print money, go fossil free". Carney has embraced the issue in the past, warning bank bosses that they must play a key role in tackling global warming - rather than blithely lending to fossil fuel producers. But clearly he, and the Bank, are under pressure to do more. Also coming up today The latest monthly survey of British construction is expected to show a modest return to growth last month, following a contraction in March. But the latest healthcheck on Europe's factories may be bleaker. Economists expect the eurozone factory PMI (delayed by May Day yesterday) will keep languishing at just 47.8, which would signal a contraction. The agenda 8.30am BST: Climate change protests outside the Bank of England 9am BST: Eurozone factory PMI for April 9.30am BST: UK construction PMI for April 12pm BST: Bank of England interest rate decision 12.30pm BST: BoE governor Mark Carney holds press conference 30209 false false      Climate change activists outside the Bank of England today        Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, speaking during today's press conference           Filled oil drums are seen at Royal Dutch Shell Plc's lubricants blending plant in the town of Torzhok, Russia        The Bank of England in the City of London.     

Load-Date: May 2, 2019


End of Document




IPCC climate change report calls for urgent action to phase out fossil fuels - as it happened; UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says coal-fired electricity must end by 2050 if we are to limit global warming rises to 1.5C Full report: We have 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe, warns UNOverwhelmed by climate change? Here's what you can do
The Guardian(London)
October 8, 2018 Monday 1:11 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:24
Length: 19527 words
Byline: Matthew Taylor, Matthew Weaver and Helen Davidson
Body


block-time published-time 12.14pm BST 
Summary: 
    • The world's leading climate scientists have warned there is only 12 years to be kept to a maximum of 1.5C and avoid catastrophic environmental breakdown.
    • The authors of the landmark report by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) said urgent and unprecedented changes are needed to reach the target, which is affordable and feasible although it lies at the most ambitious end of the Paris agreement pledge to keep temperatures between 1.5C and 2C.
    • Debra Roberts, a co-chair of the IPCC working group, said: "It's a line in the sand and what it says to our species is that this is the moment and we must act now. This is the largest clarion bell from the science community and I hope it mobilises people and dents the mood of complacency."
    • Political leaders have been urged to act on the report. Christiana Figueres, the former UN climate chief who led the historic Paris agreement of 2015, said : "There is nothing opaque about this new data. The illustrations of mounting impacts, the fast-approaching and irreversible tipping points are visceral versions of a future that no policy-maker could wish to usher in or be responsible for."
That is it from the liveblog. For all the news and reaction to the IPCC report please follow our coverage here. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.16pm BST
block-time published-time 11.31am BST 
 Julie Hirigoyen, chief executive at UK Green Building Council  (UKGBC), said:
This report from the IPCC is a wake-up call for governments and businesses across the globe. One of the goals of the international 2015 COP21 climate deal was to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognising that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change. This latest IPCC report points to the urgency and scale of action required to achieve this, which should be keenly reviewed by every single boardroom. There is no doubt that business leaders need to make bold decisions today to transition to a low/no-carbon economy that can sustain future generations.
The construction and property industry in the UK is an economic juggernaut, and our buildings account for approximately 30% of carbon emissions. It is also the industry with the most cost-effective means of reducing carbon emissions so it will be a vital catalyst for change in the wider economy. At UKGBC we know that built environment businesses can, and must, lead the charge against climate change. Our Advancing Net Zero programme is a collaborative initiative to drive the transition to a net zero carbon built environment by 2050 - which would be commensurate with the 1.5°C limit. Only by all working together to effect change at speed and at scale will we stand any chance of rising to the challenge outlined today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.10pm BST
block-time published-time 11.28am BST 
According to my colleague Jon Watts, the big question now is whether governments will act on the report or ignore it:
In Britain, the next step will be a meeting in parliament to discuss how to move towards net zero emissions. It will be chaired by Lord Krebs, former member of the Committee on Climate Change (CCC), and speakers will include Prof Jim Skea, who was co-chair of an IPCC working group, and Baroness Brown. The government to expected to formally ask the CCC for advice around 15 October.
More details here: https://eciu.net/events/2018/going-net-zero-on-climate-challenges-and-opportunities-for-the-uk
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.10pm BST
block-time published-time 11.16am BST 
 Gebru Jember Endalew, the chair of the Least Developed Countries Group, one of the key negotiating blocks in climate talks representing the world's poorest countries, said: 
Communities across the world are already experiencing the devastating impacts of 1C global warming. Each fraction of a degree that global temperatures rise is extremely dangerous.
Limiting global temperature increases to 1.5C means significantly decreased levels of food insecurity, water shortages, destruction of infrastructure, and displacement from sea level rise and other impacts. To the lives and livelihoods of billions, that half a degree is everything.
Endalew said the report made clear that there is an urgent need to "accelerate the global response to climate change to avoid exceeding the 1.5C limit", adding:
Governments must increase climate action now and submit more ambitious plans for the future. This includes increasing the level of support to developing countries to enable them to develop and lift their people out of poverty without going down a traditional, unsustainable development pathway.
On the issue of loss and damage, Endalew said: 
This IPCC report confirms that loss and damage resulting from climate change will only worsen with further warming with much greater losses at 2C than at 1.5C. It is particularly vulnerable countries like the least developed countries that are worst affected by the devastating impacts of climate change and bear the greatest cost from the damage it causes, despite contributing the least to the problem. This injustice must be addressed by the international community through the provision of support for dealing with loss and damage.
The most important message of this IPCC report is that achieving 1.5C is necessary, achievable and urgent. A safer, more prosperous future is possible with immediate action to implement transformative change across societies. There is a need to take advantage of the increasing availability of affordable, renewable and efficient energy solutions, rapidly reduce the use of fossil fuels, with coal phased out by mid-century, preserve and restore forests and soils, promote sustainable agriculture and implement other real climate solutions that together can bring about a zero-carbon economy.
On the implementation guidelines for the Paris agreement that are due at COP24 in December 2018, he said:
The IPCC report has made even clearer the need for the Paris rulebook to properly reflect the breadth of action required by all countries to achieve the agreement's 1.5C goal. Countries must deliver a robust rulebook that will ensure adequate action is taken to cut emissions, adapt to climate change and address loss and damage, and that support is provided to enable poorer countries to do the same.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11pm BST
block-time published-time 10.48am BST 
 Dr Jo House, reader in environmental science and policy at the Cabot Institute, University of Bristol, said today's report underlines the need "to rapidly replace fossil fuel emissions with low-cost renewable energy technologies that are already widely available".
She added:
The report also highlights the urgent needs to protect forests and peatlands - these store more carbon than fossil fuel reserves, but also suck it out of the atmosphere, removing nearly a third of our current carbon dioxide emissions. Planting new forests can remove carbon from the atmosphere, as can using plants' biomass for energy with carbon capture and storage technology. Some scenarios rely on planting up to 700Mha of land to bioenergy crops - that's twice the size of India. To avoid relying on land for bioenergy mitigation, competing with food and nature, we have to address fossil fuel and industrial emissions. The IPCC will produce a special report on climate change and land next year to look further into land based mitigation and the co-benefits and tradeoffs.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11pm BST
block-time published-time 10.35am BST 
This is a good video from climate campaigner Bill McKibben (thanks for highlighting, @jessthecrip). 
He says although individual choices about how we live are important, it is only by coming together and forcing through real systemic change (100% renewable towns and cities, keeping carbon in the ground and divestment from fossil fuels) that climate breakdown can be avoided. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11pm BST
block-time published-time 10.16am BST 
There is no shortage of political opposition to meaningful climate action, from the US president, Donald Trump, to Brazil's far-right populist Jair Bolsonaro. And this morning Australia's prime minister, Scott Morrison, has put himself firmly in that category.
Speaking before the IPCC report was released he said there was no money for "global climate conferences and all that nonsense".
Here is the full story from my colleague Paul Karp.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11pm BST
block-time published-time 9.49am BST 
 George Monbiot has written a powerful thread about the threat we face and what needs to be done:
enltr1. Because the lobbying power of fossil fuel-based businesses outweighs that of any other faction. The fossil fuel industry uses its profits to lobby for continued extraction and use. Its tactics are highly sophisticated.
- GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
enltr3. This campaign of denial resonates with an innate resistance to change, reinforced by a tendency known as System Justification: a fundamental human weakness.
- GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
enltr5. Perpetual growth was impossible until coal was widely used: before then, industrial expansion led to agricultural depression, breaking the cycle of accumulation (see EA Wrigley, Energy and the English Industrial Revoliution). So we came to see progress = growth = fossil fuel
- GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
enltr7. This shift will not occur through buying different products or reducing the use of plastic bags, or any other form of voluntary consumer action, valid as these may be. It will occur only through political action.
- GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
enltr8. What does this mean? Mobilisation on a massive scale, through groups such as https://t.co/iQUIxrOaMa, to put environmental breakdown at the front and centre of political life. We need to break through vested interests, denial and System Justification to force government action
- GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
enltr10. We need to get embarassing about it, to overcome our own reticence, even when we are labelled Jeremiahs or Cassandras, and risk upsetting people in alerting them to what is happening and what we need to do. https://t.co/eqXaLi7JQY
 - GeorgeMonbiot (@GeorgeMonbiot) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12pm BST
block-time published-time 9.38am BST 
More from Labour's Rebecca Long-Bailey on Labour's commitment to tackling climate breakdown: 
enltrBecause it is not lack of knowledge which is preventing action on #ClimateChange 2/
- Rebecca Long-Bailey (@RLong_Bailey) October 8, 2018
enltrAnd it is not lack of technology that is preventing action on #ClimateChange 4/
- Rebecca Long-Bailey (@RLong_Bailey) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12pm BST
block-time published-time 9.30am BST 
Caroline Lucas, MP for and former leader of the Green party, said:
This report couldn't be written in stronger terms: we are at a tipping point on the edge of complete climate breakdown, and governments around the world are failing to prevent it.
Our own government is pushing us towards that tipping point with carbon intensive and ecologically destructive projects like airport expansion, fracking and HS2 - while slashing support for renewables and continuing to subsidise fossil fuels.
Ministers have a choice: they can keep coating business-as-usual policies in a green veneer and watch as floods and heatwaves become the norm. Or they can embrace the opportunities to create a fairer, healthier, safer society that come with the economic overhaul we need.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.49am BST
block-time published-time 9.27am BST 
It is worth revisiting this piece from last week by my colleague George Monbiot, who argues that unless we kick our addiction to economic growth we can not meet the challenge posed by the unfolding climate breakdown.
Given that economic growth, in nations that are already rich enough to meet the needs of all, requires an increase in pointless consumption, it is hard to see            how it can ever be decoupled from the assault on the living planet.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.49am BST
block-time published-time 9.21am BST 
The Aldersgate Group, which represents some of the of the UK's leading businesses, said the report sets out clear opportunities for a zero-carbon economy.
Nick Molho, executive director, said:  
This report from the world's leading climate scientists is clear that there are compelling environmental, economic and social benefits to limiting the increase in global temperatures to 1.5C as envisaged in the Paris agreement. Whilst achieving such a target will require challenging emission cuts across the economy, important progress has already been made and an increase in ambition would unlock a significant innovation and investment opportunity.
He added:
With strengths in areas such as offshore wind and electric vehicle manufacturing, energy efficient building design and green financial and legal services, UK businesses have a strong basis from which to accelerate emission cuts and be at the forefront of the development of the new clean technologies and services which the world economy will increasingly demand.
Major economies now need to increase their existing emissions reduction pledges under the Paris agreement and adopt net zero-emissions targets in line with the conclusions of the IPCC report. The prime minister made the right call when she announced at the UN general assembly that the UK will be joining the Carbon Neutrality Coalition, especially as this follows growing public backing and cross-party support for a net zero target.
The government must now begin work towards legislating for such a target in the UK, by rapidly acting on its commitment to seek the Committee on Climate Change's advice on how the UK can ensure its climate targets are aligned with the 1.5C goal. Backed by detailed policies, such a target would accelerate investment in ultra-low-emission goods, services and infrastructure and support the innovation needed to tackle emission cuts in more challenging sectors such as land management, agriculture, long-distance transport and heavy industry.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.48am BST
block-time published-time 9.07am BST 
 Claire Perry, minister for energy, has put out a brief statement. 
This report should act as a rallying cry for governments around the world to innovate, invest, and raise ambition to avert catastrophic climate change. The UK has already shown carbon abatement and prosperity can go hand-in-hand and we lead the world in clean growth, slashing emissions by more than 40% since 1990 while growing our economy ahead of the G7. There is now no excuse and real action is needed.
She added that in a "few days", during the "first-ever Green GB Week", the government will "outline our next steps to confront this global crisis".
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.37am BST
block-time published-time 9.01am BST 
Jagoda Munic, director of Friends of the Earth Europe, said the message from the report was stark, and warned that Europe was not doing enough:
The fossil fuel age has to end... To have any chance of avoiding the chaos, droughts and rising tides of 1.5C or more of global warming, we must massively and speedily transform our society to kick our fossil fuel addiction.
Munic said a "safer, fairer and cleaner fossil-free" Europe was possible, with many communities already showing the way, from resisting dirty energy projects to installing community-owned renewable energy schemes.
She said the EU is still planning to keep emitting carbon beyond 2050, and is currently only considering committing to "net zero emissions" by that year. 
She argued that as one of the regions most responsible for causing climate change, and most capable of responding, the EU needs to act at much greater speed and scale.
The EU must do its fair share, beginning with completely stopping funding for fossil fuels and switching to 100% renewables by 2030. Currently the EU is far off track. Going to 'net zero' by 2050 is simply too late for Europe to stop burning carbon - and still it does not represent zero fossil fuels. Europe needs a completely fossil-free energy system by 2030.
Friends of the Earth Europe is calling on the EU to:
    • Urgently increase its climate ambition: increasing-short term targets to 100% renewables by 2030, and having a long-term vision in line with achieving 1.5C;
    • Completely phase out financing and building more fossil fuel infrastructure, including gas, which shackles Europe to decades more fossil fuel use - including a fossil-free EU budget;
    • Urgently increase investment in community renewables and energy savings and transform to 100% renewables based on a democratically owned energy system.
Karin Nansen, chair of Friends of the Earth International, said: 
This is a climate emergency - for many around the world preventing climate catastrophe and temperature rises exceeding 1.5C is a matter of life and death. Only radical system change offers a pathway towards hope and out of despair. We want a just transition to a clean energy system that benefits people, not corporations.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.14pm BST
block-time published-time 8.57am BST 
The Aldersgate Group, an alliance of leading business groups committed to sustainable economy, has welcomed the report.
Here's a selection of what some of its prominent members have said:
 Steve Waygood, chief responsible investment officer, Aviva Investors:  
Keeping global temperature increases to 1.5C will help safeguard our investment portfolios and protect our customers savings. The long-term negative financial consequences of climate change are far, far greater than the short-term financial risks of transitioning to the Paris agreement. Today's report reiterates the need for policymakers to accelerate action to reduce carbon emissions and meet the agreed aims of the Paris agreement.
 Gabrielle Ginér, head of environmental sustainability at BT:  
Our target is to reduce the carbon emissions intensity of our operations by 87% by 2030 against a 2016/17 baseline.
 Pia Heidenmark Cook, chief sustainability officer at Ikea:  
We will contribute by decarbonising our energy use including electricity and heating, using zero-emissions deliveries, moving to a circular business model and enabling millions of customers and co-workers to take climate action in their everyday lives.
 Benet Northcote, director of corporate responsibility at John Lewis Partnership: 
We have already cut our operational emission intensity by nearly 70% since 2010 and over the coming months we will be unveiling the next stage in our plans to reduce our environmental impact and emissions even further. Waitrose and Partners continues to lead in its commitment to truly sustainable agriculture, while John Lewis and Partners is pioneering circular economy solutions that will lessen humanity's impact on the environment.
 Mike Barry, director of sustainable business at Marks and Spencer:  
We need to take bolder, faster action and shift our mind-set to one of embracing the inevitability and opportunity of the low-carbon economy.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.33am BST
block-time published-time 8.50am BST 
More from the Labour party on today's IPCC report. 
Rebecca Long-Bailey, Labour's shadow business, energy and industrial strategy secretary, who seems to be fronting a lot of the party's climate breakdown agenda, said the report makes clear that avoiding dangerous climate change will require "a transformational effort":
That is precisely what Labour is offering - a plan to rapidly decarbonise our energy system as part of a green jobs revolution, and a long term target of net zero emissions before 2050. This would make the UK one of the few countries in the world on track to meet the Paris agreement goals.
The Tories are way off course to meeting our existing climate targets, and every day this government remains in power the window of opportunity to tackle the climate crisis shrinks. It is a cruel irony that today we were also expecting the first horizontal shale fracking in the UK - an industry the government has pushed at the expense of local communities, air quality and our climate.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30am BST
block-time published-time 8.48am BST 
Ben Backwell, chief executive of the Global Wind Energy Council, welcomed the report.
He said:
The IPCC report lays out the scale of the challenge and the opportunity ahead for the wind industry: renewables should supply 70-85% of electricity by 2050. 
We need to shoulder the responsibility and make this a reality along with our partners in solar photovoltaics and storage.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.31am BST
block-time published-time 8.45am BST 
     Mary Robinson Photograph: Ruth Medjber   
Mary Robinson, former Irish president and a UN special envoy on climate, insisted the ambitious recommendations in the report are "doable".
She told Today: "I do think this scientific report is going to be a change-maker. I'm a prisoner of hope, having learned from Archbishop Desmond Tutu, and I know how serious it is in the poorest countries, the climate issue.
"Small island states are being devastated, but so are the Carolinas in the United States and Puerto Rico, etc. We have to become human again. We have to understand that we face an existential threat that is going to undermine the future prospects for our children and grandchildren. 
"It is doable." 
She added: "Before this, people talked vaguely about staying at or below 2C - we now know that 2C is dangerous. So it is really important that governments take the responsibility, but we must all do what we can."
Robinson also backed campaigns to divest in oil companies and invest in renewable companies.
And she urged the European Union to set an example by adopting a target for having zero-carbon emissions by 2050. 
She said:
The richer parts of the world now have to really take seriously and do it the climate justice way.
This puts the responsibility on all governments to have an intense dialogue now and to explain that we have 11 years until 2030 to safeguard the world for our children and grandchildren. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.29am BST
block-time published-time 8.12am BST 
     Drax in north Yorkshire - Britain's biggest power station Photograph: Anna Gowthorpe/PA   
Barry Gardiner, shadow minister for international climate change in the UK, described the report as a "wake-up call". 
Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he said it should be seen as opportunity for the UK, not a threat. 
He said: "We in the UK are incredibly well-placed - we've got the skills, we've got the technology, we've got the natural resources of wind and wave power to lead the world in this low-carbon revolution that is going to take place."
But Gardiner struggled to answer whether a Labour government would outlaw burning wood pellets at the Drax power station in Yorkshire. 
"We must honour the must honour the commitments that have made but we must now look at the way in which we can transform the economy," he said. 
He accused Today's John Humphrys of "petty fogging" when challenged to put a price on Labour's programme to tackle climate change. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.28am BST
block-time published-time 7.49am BST 
'Trump can't tear up international agreement on climate change'
    Jim Skea Photograph: Jung Yeon-Je/AFP/Getty Images   
One of the report's authors has insisted that Donald Trump cannot derail the determination of the international community to cap global warming to 1.5C.
Prof Jim Skea, co-chair of the IPCC working group behind the report, underlined the need for "unprecedented change" during an interview for BBC Radio 4's Today programme. 
But asked about Trump's threats to tear up international agreements on climate change, Skea said: "He can't tear up the agreement, all he can do is withdraw from it. There are very clear indications from almost every other country in the world that they are going to stick with it and in fact even compensate for any gaps led by the US."
He added: "It needs big changes in all systems. Our energy systems need to change, our transportation systems - the way we manage land will become increasingly important if we are going to make a difference.
"To keep below 1.5C, or pretty close to it, we would need to see cuts in carbon dioxide emissions globally of about 45% by 2030. That is why we were saying 'unprecedented change' and setting up the challenge for governments." 
Updated at 11.26am BST
7.24am BST
A key point the IPCC has made before but which is underlined this time around: to address global warming we are going to have to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 
If the world is to limit global warming to 1.5C, it is estimated somewhere between 100 and 1,000 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide will need to effectively sucked from the sky.
This, to put it mildly, is an issue. Techniques that could be used to do it are unproven at scale and could carry significant risks. Some are basic withdrawal technologies - planting and cultivating more trees and crops - and relatively uncontroversial, though they require using land that could otherwise be employed to feed people.
Much hope in IPCC circles has previously been placed in what is known as BECCS - bioenergy with carbon capture and storage. It basically involves growing trees and other vegetation to burn for electricity and then capturing the emissions released in power generation and storing it underground. Again, it would require a massive area to be meaningful - greater than the size of India, according to some research. It has been discussed for years but progress has been limited.
The new report also mentions direct-air carbon capture and storage, a largely theoretical technique that uses large fans and chemicals to move and absorb carbon dioxide.
Then there are proposed techniques that would not reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide but mask its effects. Governments have barely begun to consider how to regulate ocean fertilisation or "enhanced weathering" techniques, which both involve introducing chemicals into environment.
Environment groups have generally resisted these approaches - there has been a not unreasonable argument that we must first cut emissions - but this is shifting. The Australian Conservation Foundation today called on governments and industry to not only reduce emissions but to urgently investigate how to remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
But these are debates that lie ahead.
Updated at 11.25am BST
7.07am BST
Summary
A landmark UN report from the intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) has delivered a dramatic and extraordinarily serious warning: We have little more than a decade to get global warming under control or the world is at risk.
    • The report was delivered in Korea on Monday, and set out the impact of a rise in global temperatures of 1.5C above pre-industrialisation levels.
    • Limiting warming to 1.5C is not impossible but will require unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society, and every bit of warming matters, the IPCC panel said.
    • Current pledges by world governments are not enough to limit rises to 1.5C.
    • The world is currently on a trajectory of 3 to 4C rises.
    • The report mapped out four pathways to achieve 1.5C, with different combinations of land use and technological change. Reforestation, shifts to electric transport systems and greater adoption of carbon capture technology are all essential.
    • We need to cut global emissions by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels.
    • The world will need to be carbon neutral by the year 2047 if we are to have a 66% chance of limiting warming to 1.5C.
    • To do that we have to source 70 to 85% of electricity from renewables within the next 32 years, put a price on greenhouse emissions, and remove carbon dioxide from Earth's atmosphere.
    • The panel said they assessed feasibility factors including technology, physics and chemistry, but the willingness of government and institutions was out of the control of scientists.
The difference between a rise of 1.5C and 2C was stark:
    • At 1.5C there would be less extreme weather where people live, including extreme heat, rainfall, and drought.
    • By 2100 sea level rises would be around 10cm lower than at 2C.
    • All coral reefs would basically cease to exist at 2C, whereas at 1.5C there is a good chance of saving 10-30% of existing ecosystems.
    • Species extinction would be lower, and there would be smaller reductions in the yields of key crops like maize, rice and wheat, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, south-east Asia, and South and Central America.
    • The proportion of the global population exposed to global warming-induced water shortages would be up to 50% less than at 2C.
    • Several hundred million fewer people would be exposed to climate change-related risk by 2050.
    • The likelihood of an Arctic Ocean free of sea ice in summer would be once per century compared with at least once per decade.
Updated at 11.24am BST
6.43am BST
Government and corporate leaders must show they understand the science and step up to the challenge set today, Greenpeace says, but it's also up to the individual.
"Every person has to do everything in their power to change course and follow the plan that is included in the IPCC report. Will we get there in time? Nobody knows," says Kaisa Kosonen, senior policy adviser at Greenpeace Nordic.
"It's uncharted territory we're heading into. What matters now is that we decide to try and that we make it our absolute priority. Only then do we have a chance to protect ourselves from the devastating impacts that science says would start accelerating after 1.5C.
" Those who say it's unrealistic are actually telling us to give up on people, to give up on species, to give up on our amazing planet. We will not accept this. "
Mari Chang, climate and energy campaigner at Greenpeace East Asia, says change is already happening in Korea, where the report was launched today.
"We're witnessing the beginning of the end of coal in Korea through game-changing decisions by Chungcheongnam-do to phase out coal and two South Korean pension funds to end coal financing," says Chang. 
"These decisions challenge the Moon government to also ramp up action in line with the Paris goals."
Updated at 11.23am BST
6.37am BST
Love to be twenty years away from an actual apocalypse and the main political response is "science isn't real"
- pixelated (something halloween-related) (@pixelatedboat) October 8, 2018
6.18am BST
"Burying our heads in the sand cannot be contemplated as an option any longer," says Glen Klatovsky, deputy chief executive of 350.org.
"The climate crisis is here and already impacting the most vulnerable and the least responsible for creating it. The only way to achieve it is to stop all fossil fuel extraction and redirect the massive resources currently spent on the fossil fuel economy towards the renewable energy transition."
The climate activist organisation said it was coordinating a global action to deliver copies of the report to institutions, demanding they end their support of the fossil fuel industry.
6.00am BST
The full report has the word "Australia" more than 30 times in body text, not including the mentions of all the Australia scientists - more than a dozen - who contributed. #SR15           #IPCC           https://t.co/48rkPEfRKY
 - Graham Readfearn (@readfearn) October 8, 2018
5.44am BST
Will governments do what's needed?
It's a "critical moment", says Jonathan Watts. In that press conference earlier was the looming reality that there is a growing gap between what scientists are urging and what politicians are willing to do.
We already know the US wants to pull out of the Paris agreement. Brazil has thrown support behind a presidential candidate who wants to do the same. Australia's prime minister has rejected calls from his party colleagues to join them but at the same time claims the country is on track to meet targets ( spoiler: it's probably not ).
"This may be the dying kicks of the fossil-fuel industry and its political lobbyists," says Watts. "Or it could be the start of a seizure of power that will be fatal to climate stabilisation efforts. A critical moment."
The panel was repeatedly asked if it was optimistic that its report would be acted on. 
It said yes, and that it looked at six conditions of feasibility: is it possible within the laws of physics and chemistry, do we have the technology, and what are the investment needs? Ther report could answer yes to those four but the final two - the capacity of government and institutions to act - were out of its hands.
"We've done our job, we've passed the message on. It's their responsibility... whether they can act on it."
Related: World leaders told they must act over climate change 'cliff-edge'
The decisions taken by political leaders in the next few years will be crucial because the investment cycle for power plants and transport systems is at least 10 years, says Johan Rockström, chief scientist at Conservation International and co-author of the recent            Hothouse Earth report.
Infastructure built now will continue to burn up carbon for decades to come if it is not re-engineered.
Rockström said the political shifts in some countries should be met with a counterbalancing move in others. 
"Every time we get leaders in the US or Brazil taking a step back then others, particularly in Europe, should take a step forward."
Updated at 6.19am BST
5.15am BST
Pep Canadell, the executive director of the Global Carbon Project, makes a good point - that this is likely to be the last reminder that the temperature rise can be limited to 1.5C if there is sufficient will.
The report finds there are no biophysical or technical roadblocks to doing it, though he says the IPCC has misstepped by talking about what needs to be achieved decades down the line given governments don't respond to those timescales.
He spells out what would need to happen, including the almost immediate establishment of a global carbon market, massive improvements in energy efficiency, recasting of people's diets, steps to reduce the expected peak global population and the immediate rollout of plans to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
"Importantly, all actions required are win-wins for society and cost less than the excess climate change damage."
Updated at 6.20am BST
4.54am BST
That's certainly one way of putting it.
When the BBC sounds like the Onion pic.twitter.com/m4a3GbF2UT
 - Brian L Kahn (@blkahn) October 8, 2018
4.41am BST
The Conversation has put together a great simplified explainer on the report "at a glance".
Along with some handy graphs and charts, the article notes the world will need to be carbon-neutral by the year 2047 if we are to have a 66% chance of limiting warming to 1.5C. That chance drops to 50% if we take until 2058.
To do that we have to source 70-85% of electricity from renewables within the next 32 years, put a price on greenhouse emissions, and remove carbon dioxide from Earth's atmosphere.
Read the full explainer here.
Updated at 11.15am BST
4.36am BST
The Australian Academy of Science has put together a video about the report.
4.22am BST
Low-lying island nations, such as those across the Pacific, have been raising their concerns for many years as they are among the first to feel the "life and death issue" of rising sea levels.
"Pacific Island nations have long maintained that we need "1.5 to stay alive'," said Maria Timon Chi-Fang, Pacific outreach officer for the Pacific Calling Partnership. "My home country of Kiribati is only two metres above sea level, and sea level rise is a life-or-death issue for us. Already with 1C of warming, we are seeing more frequent and damaging storms, the loss of our crop-growing lands and freshwater resources, and our homes flooded. "Many I-Kiribati are already resigned to having to leave home as life on the islands becomes untenable, and we know many of our Pacific neighbours are facing the same crisis. "We call on Australia and other big carbon polluters to give us a fair go at preserving our culture and having the dignified, safe and secure future that we deserve."
Updated at 4.44am BST
4.09am BST
Still in Australia, which I earlier noted was reportedly among nations to push back on elements of the report about a coal phase-out (the government denies this):
Prime minister Scott Morrison - under fire for having recently abandoned a policy to cut emissions from electricity - said his government would "look at the report carefully" but claimed "only a year ago the same report said that the policies Australia has was right on the money".
 It isn't clear which report he was referring to - the special report is a one-off and the IPCC last published a major assessment in 2013-14. Morrison went on to say Australia was responsible for a little more than 1% of global emissions.
There are a lot bigger players than us out there... emissions per capita in Australia are at their lowest level for decades... but at the end of the day we want to ensure electricity prices are lower.
 Australia, of course, is heavily reliant on coal, which the report says would basically need to be finished as an energy source by mid-century.
 The opposition leader Bill Shorten - according to opinion polls, favoured to take power at an election next year - said fossil fuels would not disappear but he wanted to see more renewable energy. He has promised it would deliver 50% of electricity by 2030, up from about 20% today.
Updated at 4.46am BST
3.56am BST
Climate risk to coral reefs underestimated
There's an interesting part of the report which relates to coral, and specifically the large-scale bleaching events which hit the Great Barrier Reef, off Australia's north-east coast, in recent years.
The bleaching events were predicted, but came far sooner than expected, leading the report to conclude the  research community had possibly underestimated the impact of global warming on coral.
Interesting admission in full #IPCC           #SR15 report on impacts of warming on corals. ".. the research community has under-estimated climate risks for coral reefs."            pic.twitter.com/UOfHSs3lqL
 - Graham Readfearn (@readfearn) October 8, 2018
Adam Morton reports here that the difference between a rise of 1.5C instead of 2C is a matter of survival for the Great Barrier Reef.
Today's report found that coral reefs were likely to decline between 70% and 90% if the temperature increased to 1.5C.
Dire enough, to be sure, but if global warming reaches 2C, more than 99% of coral reefs were projected to decline.
"Going to 2C and above gets to a point where corals can no longer grow back, or you have annual bleaching events," said Professor Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, a coordinating lead author on the report and a coral reefs expert with the University of Queensland.
"On the other hand, at 1.5C there's still significant areas which are not heating up or not exposed to the same levels of stress such that they would lose coral, and so we're fairly confident that we would have parts of those ecosystems remaining."
Related: Great Barrier Reef faces dire threat with 2C global warming, UN report says
Updated at 4.47am BST
3.35am BST
Still a future for coal, coal association says
I am keeping one ear on the press conference as I bring you the international reaction to this report. 
The panel has just been asked if the fossil fuel industry was represented.
Yes, in a word - the plenary sessions included observer organisations, and "they were in the room".
Outside the press conference, the interim chief executive of the World Coal Association, Katie Warrick, tells us it believes there is still a future for coal.
While we are still reviewing the draft, the World Coal Association believes that any credible pathway to meeting the 1.5C scenario must focus on emissions rather than fuel. That is why [carbon capture and storage] is so vital.
Forecasts from the [International Energy Agency] and other credible experts continue to see a role for coal for the foreseeable future. Going into COP24, we will be campaigning for greater action on all low emissions technologies including CCS.
The report has said fossil fuels, in particular coal, must be phased out. It's probably a good moment for me to re-up this quote from the panel earlier:
"All options need to be exercised... We can make choices about how much of each option we use... but the idea you can leave anything out is impossible." 
And this:
Q: How soon do coal, oil, and natural gas need to be phased out entirely? IPCC: "The report is quite clear... all pathways require quite significant changes in the pattern of fossil fuel use.... Coal will have to be reduced very, very substantially by mid-century."
- Eric Holthaus (@EricHolthaus) October 8, 2018
Updated at 11.05am BST
3.20am BST
Ban Ki-moon, former United Nations secretary general:
Equity, inclusivity and cooperation must underpin our collective response to meet the 1.5°C target, with states acting in the same spirit that led to the Paris agreement and the sustainable development goals. Climate change respects no borders; our actions must transcend all frontiers.
Gro Harlem Brundtland, acting chair of the Elders, former prime minister of Norway:
This report is not a wake-up call, it is a ticking time bomb. Climate activists have been calling for decades for leaders to show responsibility and take urgent action, but we have barely scratched the surface of what needs to be done. Further failure would be an unconscionable betrayal of the planet and future generations.
Mary Robinson, former president of Ireland, former UN high commissioner for human rights and former UN special envoy on climate change:
The IPCC report starkly sets out the challenges of securing a just transition to a 1.5C world, and the urgency with which this needs to be accomplished. This can only be done by  a people-centred, rights-based approach with justice and solidarity at its heart. The time for talking is long past; leaders need to step up, serve their people and act immediately.
Ricardo Lagos, former president of Chile, former UN special envoy on Climate Change:
The threats posed by climate change to planetary health cannot be understated. The time for stating the scale of the problem has passed, and we now need to move to urgent, radical action to keep temperature rises to 1.5°C. It cannot be left to climate scientists and activists alone - it is a battle that must be joined by all those with an interest in our future survival.
Ernesto Zedillo, former president of Mexico:
If we allow temperatures to rise above 1.5°C then all the progress on prosperity, growth and development risks being wiped out. Our economic paradigm needs to shift to promote zero-carbon, climate-resilient policies. T his means putting a price on carbon and investing in new, sustainable technologies, but also giving those most affected a voice in developing new growth models.
Amjad Abdulla, chief negotiator for the Alliance of Small Island States, and IPCC board member:
The report shows that we only have the slimmest of opportunities remaining to avoid unthinkable damage to the climate system that supports life as we know it. I have no doubt that historians will look back at these findings as one of the defining moments in the course of human affairs. I urge all civilised nations to take responsibility for it by dramatically increasing our efforts to cut the emissions responsible for the crisis and to do what is necessary to help vulnerable people respond to some of the devastating consequences we now know can no longer be avoided.
Updated at 11.04am BST
3.15am BST
The Trump administration is a "rogue outlier", says the former US vice president Al Gore.
Responding to the IPCC report, Gore said the Paris agreement was "monumental" but now nations had to go further, and time was running out. 
"Solving the climate crisis requires vision and leadership. Unfortunately, the Trump administration has become a rogue outlier in its shortsighted attempt to prop up the dirty fossil fuel industries of the past. The administration is in direct conflict with American businesses, states, cities and citizens leading the transformation." 
Updated at 11.04am BST
3.07am BST
The IPCC report is a wake-up call for slumbering world leaders," says Andrew Steer, president and CEO, World Resources Institute.
"The difference in impacts between 1.5 and 2C of warming is large, and potentially game changing. And, the devastation that would come with today's 3-4C trajectory would be vastly greater. Each tenth of a degree matters - and tragically it's the poor who will be most affected."
The consequences of #climate change in a 2°C world are far greater than with 1.5°C of warming. But the world is far off track from either.            https://t.co/opTouzN3qg           #SR15           #IPCC           pic.twitter.com/W4weC6p3ta
 - WRI Climate (@WRIClimate) October 8, 2018
Updated at 11.01am BST
3.04am BST
So is the 1.5C target feasible? That's the big early question.
Professor Piers Forster from the University of Leeds is one of the lead authors of the Special Report chapter, which looks at the different "pathways" that governments could take. He tells me he is "exhausted but elated" the report was finished on time (one of the sessions went for 30 hours straight). 
Forster says the report "shows that limiting warming to 1.5C is barely feasible and every year we delay the window of feasibility halves. Nevertheless, if we were to succeed, we go on to show that benefits across society will be huge and the world will be all the richer for it. It's a battle worth winning."
Here's something to understand. The report sets out four different "pathways" that governments could choose. As one of the IPCC co-chairs, Jim Skea, says, "it's possible within the laws of physics and chemistry ... It's up to the governments to decide that last step of feasibility." 
Updated at 11.01am BST
2.58am BST
There is an absolute mountain of reaction coming through to the report. I'll bring it to you shortly. 
Here's a piece written by Nicholas Stern, IG Patel professor of economics and government and chair of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political Science. 
Stern authored the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change for the UK government.
Human activities are currently emitting about 42bn tonnes of carbon dioxide every year, and at that rate the carbon budget - allowing us a 50-50 chance of keeping warming to 1.5C - would be exhausted within 20 years.
Even 1.5C of warming would have brutal consequences, according to the report. Poor people, in particular, would suffer as the threat of food and water shortages increase in some parts of the world.
But the report makes clear that allowing warming to reach 2C would create risks that any reasonable person would regard as deeply dangerous.
Related: We must reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero or face more floods | Nicholas Stern
2.51am BST
Question: What did it feel like personally, as humans, compiling this report?
"It's a tremendous collective endeavour."
"There is space [to act] but the space is shrinking. We can still do it as a universal humanity, and I think that was the spirit of this."
"The urgency of the issue is being seen because climate change is shaping the future of our civilisation. If action is not taken it will take the planet into an unprecedented climate situation [and] the scale of the changes humans would have to implement... is unprecedented... This report is a milestone in conveying that message."
Updated at 11.00am BST
2.40am BST
Every emissions reduction option must be used: IPCC panel
Some pretty direct statements coming from the panel towards the end of the press conference. 
The report shows we are at a crossroads, and what happens between now and 2030 is critical, especially for Co2 emissions. If we don't act now and have substantial reductions in emissions over the next decade we are making it very challenging to impossible to keep global warming to just 1.5C.
Asked by a reporter about the difference in benefits of reforestation or carbon emission reductions, the panel has a stark response:
The word "or" does not work in relation to reductions. The only linking word you can use is "and".
"All options need to be exercised... We can make choices about how much of each option we use... but the idea you can leave anything out is impossible."
Updated at 10.59am BST
2.36am BST
One of the key questions repeatedly coming up is whether world governments will act on the report's warnings and recommendations.
This observation is from our global environment editor, formerly Latin America correspondent.
World scientists say forests are essential if global warming is to keep to 1.5C on the same day that 46% of Brazilians vote for a presidential candidate who has vowed to open the Amazon to agribusiness. https://t.co/67KFPKBV18
 - jonathanwatts (@jonathanwatts) October 8, 2018
2.34am BST
Question: What consumer aspects does the report tackle? What lifestyle changes can people make?
Answer:  The report is also clear that everyone has the means to act relating to daily choices. Energy demands and diets are both key parts of the pathways to reductions.
2.24am BST
The presentation is done, I'll now bring you some key Q&As from the floor.
Question: Every IPCC report suggests greenhouse gases need to be reduced urgently. What's new about this report?
Answer: The report is new in providing clear knowledge about differences in risks and impact from half a degree warning, with robust findings that weren't previously available. "It's very clear that half a degree matters."
Question: How optimistic are you on a scale from one to 10?
Answer: One thing the report did not aspire to do was assess feasibility. We identified six different conditions that needed to be met for 1.5C to be achievable.
One of those was is it possible within the laws of physics and chemistry? Yes it is.
Do we have the technology? What are the investment needs?
But two things that can't be answered by scientists are the political and institutional feasibility.
"We've done our job, we've passed the message on. It's their responsibility... whether they can act on it."
Question: What about the US pulling out of Paris?
Answer:  This is a literature review, and we haven't found literature out there that looks at the implication of the US pulling out of Paris. We've sent a clear signal to collectivity countries, of which the US is still one. 
The report is clear that reducing emissions early on is needed to prevent overshoot. If we overshoot 1.5C global warning, then we would rely on carbon dioxide removal to go back. Early action to reduce emissions is possible - there are options are available. But there is an urgent need to accelerate.
Updated at 10.58am BST
2.18am BST
We earlier heard from the co-chairs of the report a summary of the differences between 1.5C and 2C temperature rises. Here's more from Adam Morton.
A major point of the report, obviously enough, is to illustrate the difference between limiting warming to 1.5C and 2C by 2100.
Sarah Perkins-Kirkpatrick, a research fellow at the Climate Change Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, has pulled together a good summary that we've adapted and expanded:
    • All coral reefs would basically cease to exist at 2C, whereas at 1.5C there is a good chance of saving 10-30% of existing ecosystems.
    • Sea level rise would be about 10cm less at 1.5C. This might not sound much, but it is significant - it would mean less salt water intrusion in low-lying islands, less loss of available land and up to 10 million fewer people being exposed to risks (based on 2010 population data).
    • Heatwaves, which can be fatal to humans and play a part in wrecking ecosystems, would be less frequent and not last as long.
    • Marine heatwaves would also not happen as frequently. More marine species would survive, and the impact on fisheries and aquaculture would be reduced.
    • Tropical cyclones would carry less water, reducing the impact of floods.
    • There is a good chance that droughts would be less severe, with obvious ramifications for food security and water availability.
    • The overall impact on human health - in terms of the impact of vector-borne diseases, heatwaves and ozone depletion - would be reduced.
    • The likelihood of a n Arctic Ocean free of sea ice in summer would be once per century compared with at least once per decade.
    • It is estimated it would prevent thawing over centuries of a permafrost area of 1.5 to 2.5m sq km. Permafrost thawing could trigger accelerated warming as greenhouse gases it has trapped are released.
    • More species are likely to survive. At 1.5C, 4% of vertebrates, 6% of insects and 8% of plants are expected to lose over half the geographic range in which they can live. At 2C, it is 8% of vertebrates, 18% of insects and 16% of plants.
Updated at 10.55am BST
2.16am BST
Current promises aren't enough
However, these limits require changes on an "unprecedented scale".
Rapid progress is being made in some areas but needs to be picked up in transport and land management.
We need to start taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere in this century, using tree-planting, carbon capture and storage, land management, and other "novel approaches", but this has implications on food security and biosecurity.
Current pledges by world governments are not enough to limit rises to 1.5C.
Updated at 10.57am BST
2.14am BST
More from the co-chairs:
    • Since pre industrial times human activities have already caused about 1C of global warming. We're already seeing the consequences for people, nature and livelihoods.
    • If the world continues to warm at the current rate, global temperatures are likely to reach 1.5C between 2030 and 2052.
The differences limiting the rise to 1.5C intead of 2C include:
    • There would be less extreme weather where people live, including extreme heat, rainfal, and drought.
    • By 2100 sea level rises would be around 10cm lower than at 2C.
    • Species extinction would be lower, and there would be smaller reductions in the yields of key crops like maize, rice and wheat, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, south-east Asia, and South and Central America.
    • The proportion of the global population exposed to global-warming-induced water shortages would be up to 50% less than at 2C.
    • Several hundred million fewer people would be exposed to climate-change-related risk by 2050.
Updated at 10.56am BST
2.08am BST
Limiting warming to 1.5C is not impossible but will require unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society, says Hoesung Lee.
Every bit of warming matters, he says, before handing over to co-chairs.
A huge degree of difference. New #IPCC           #SR15 report spells out difference in harms between another 0.9 and 1.8 dF of warming. Lost lives, coral & maybe ice sheet. But it is unlikely world can limit warming to lower goal.            https://t.co/Hjeg9wldfn           pic.twitter.com/XBiGdrkHtQ
 - seth borenstein (@borenbears) October 8, 2018
2.06am BST
The current global state-of-play as described in the report:
    • Human activities have caused about 1C of global warming since pre-industrial times (expressed as a likely range of 0.8-1.2C).
    • We are seeing the effects of this through increased extreme weather, rising sea levels, coral bleaching and shrinking Arctic sea ice, among other changes.
    • We're likely to reach 1.5C warming sometime between 2030 and 2052 on the current path. The effects of this warming would be materially and noticeably different from today. It would be worse again at 2C and higher temperature rises.
    • To limit warming to 1.5C we need to cut global emissions by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels.
    • Scientists say it could be done but it would require rapid action now. It would mean significant changes in all sectors of society. We would also need to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
Updated at 10.54am BST
2.05am BST
The chair of the IPCC, Hoesung Lee, is now addressing media on what he calls "one of the most important reports" produced by the IPCC, and "certainly one of the most keenly awaited".
He says previous reports gave governments a clear understanding of the implications of 2C warming, but there was "relatively little" about 1.5C.
This is the first time in IPCC's history that all three working groups worked together to produce the report, which was put together in a very short amount of time, what he calls a "Herculean effort".
Updated at 10.54am BST
2.02am BST
Global warming must not exceed 1.5C, warns landmark UN report
The report is public.
"It's a line in the sand and what it says to our species is that this is the moment and we must act now," says Debra Roberts, a co-chair of the working group on impacts. 
"This is the largest clarion bell from the science community and I hope it mobilises people and dents the mood of complacency."
Read our full report from our global environment editor Jonathan Watts here.
The authors of the landmark report say urgent and unprecedented changes are needed to reach the target, which they say is affordable and feasible although it lies at the most ambitious end of the Paris agreement pledge to keep temperatures between 1.5C and 2C.
The half-degree difference could also prevent corals from being completely eradicated and ease pressure on the Arctic, according to the 1.5C study, which was launched in Incheon in South Korea after approval at a final plenary of all 195 countries that saw delegates hugging one another, with some in tears.
Updated at 10.53am BST
1.59am BST
The IPCC press conference will start in a few minutes, and I'll bring you updates. We'll also have extensive reporting and analysis on the report itself.
In the meantime, here's a recent piece on the possibility of the Earth becoming a "hothouse".
As things stand, if you add up all the things that the 190-plus countries have committed to do as part of that Paris deal, global temperatures will probably go well above 3C, writes Graham Readfearn.
We're already at 1C of warming, so the extra half a degree isn't far away - many scientists will say it's already locked in, while others say there are plausible ways to stabilise temperatures at that level.
But in August, one of the world's leading scientific journals - the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - published a "perspective" article that has become known as the "hothouse Earth" paper.
There was no new science in the paper and while it was speculative, it did raise fundamental questions about the ability of governments around the world to stop the Earth from spiralling into a "hothouse".
Related: Earth's climate monsters could be unleashed as temperatures rise | Graham Readfearn
Updated at 10.51am BST
1.35am BST
Some information on the report itself, outlined by chair of the IPCC, Hoesung Lee, in a speech last week ( pdf ).
It was commissioned as part of the Paris agreement in 2016, the IPCC was invited to prepare a report assessing the impacts of 1.5C warming and related emissions pathways.
At that time, relatively little was known about the risks avoided in a 1.5C world compared with a 2C warmer world, or about the pathway of greenhouse gas emissions compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5C.
In February 2017 the panel announced 91 authors and review editors, from 40 countries. There are 133 contributing authors. 
The final report contains more than 6,000 cited references.
The first order draft attracted almost 13,000 comments from about 500 experts across 61 countries.
The second order draft attracted more than 25,000 comments from 570 experts and officials in 71 countries.
The final government draft received almost 4,000 comments from government, bringing the total amount of comments to 42,000, each of which must be addressed by the authors.
Updated at 10.50am BST
1.21am BST
Politically, the issue of global warming and how to address it is in a much more precarious situation than when this report was commissioned in 2016.
Donald Trump has pledged to withdraw the US from the Paris accord. The Australian government - currently coming through another bout of leadership instability - has also flagged withdrawing. It was already failing its targets.
Jair Bolsonaro, who today won the first round of voting in the presidential election in Brazil, has also pledged to withdraw from the Accord and to open up the Amazon for agribusiness.
On the other side are low-lying island nations already feeling the impact of rising sea levels.
The Marshall Islands has announced a plan to reach net zero emissions by 2050. 
"If we can do it, so can everyone else," said president Hilda Heine.
Updated at 10.49am BST
1.11am BST
In a little under an hour, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will be releasing its highly anticipated special report on global warming of 1.5C.
The news is not good, with the report - based on more than 6,000 scientific works - expected to warn that the world is nowhere near on track to reach its targets unless there is drastic, world-changing action immediately. 
That means a massive transformation in the way the world generates energy - phasing out fossil fuels and coal in particular, as well as how it uses transportation and grows food.
"It's extraordinarily challenging to get to the 1.5C target and we are nowhere near on track to doing that," co-author Drew Shindell, a Duke University climate scientist, told the Guardian last month.
There were reports of pushback during the drafting, including from Japan, South Korea, Poland, Estonia and Australia. Australia, where the government is extraordinarily pro-coal, is currently debating withdrawing from the Paris agreement and is the world's largest coal exporter. Its environment minister denied the claims.
The world has already warmed 1C, and the 2015 Paris agreement saw countries agree to curb rises to 2C above pre-industrialisation levels and to pursue efforts to limit the increase to 1.5C.
Updated at 10.48am BST
91852018-10-08T12:30:00Ztrue2018-10-08T00:11:59Zfalsefalse2018-10-08T14:24:45ZfalseAUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/9td59falsetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/26da604fc04d9ff921513636a43177c8873496a2/0_192_2560_1536/500.jpgfalseenSummary: The world's leading climate scientists have warned there is only 12 years to be kept to a maximum of 1.5C and avoid catastrophic environmental breakdown. The authors of the landmark report by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) said urgent and unprecedented changes are needed to reach the target, which is affordable and feasible although it lies at the most ambitious end of the Paris agreement pledge to keep temperatures between 1.5C and 2C. Debra Roberts, a co-chair of the IPCC working group, said: "It's a line in the sand and what it says to our species is that this is the moment and we must act now. This is the largest clarion bell from the science community and I hope it mobilises people and dents the mood of complacency." Political leaders have been urged to act on the report. Christiana Figueres, the former UN climate chief who led the historic Paris agreement of 2015, said: "There is nothing opaque about this new data. The illustrations of mounting impacts, the fast-approaching and irreversible tipping points are visceral versions of a future that no policy-maker could wish to usher in or be responsible for." That is it from the liveblog. For all the news and reaction to the IPCC report please follow our coverage here. Julie Hirigoyen, chief executive at UK Green Building Council (UKGBC), said: This report from the IPCC is a wake-up call for governments and businesses across the globe. One of the goals of the international 2015 COP21 climate deal was to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognising that this would significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change. This latest IPCC report points to the urgency and scale of action required to achieve this, which should be keenly reviewed by every single boardroom. There is no doubt that business leaders need to make bold decisions today to transition to a low/no-carbon economy that can sustain future generations. The construction and property industry in the UK is an economic juggernaut, and our buildings account for approximately 30% of carbon emissions. It is also the industry with the most cost-effective means of reducing carbon emissions so it will be a vital catalyst for change in the wider economy. At UKGBC we know that built environment businesses can, and must, lead the charge against climate change. Our Advancing Net Zero programme is a collaborative initiative to drive the transition to a net zero carbon built environment by 2050 - which would be commensurate with the 1.5°C limit. Only by all working together to effect change at speed and at scale will we stand any chance of rising to the challenge outlined today. According to my colleague Jon Watts, the big question now is whether governments will act on the report or ignore it: In Britain, the next step will be a meeting in parliament to discuss how to move towards net zero emissions. It will be chaired by Lord Krebs, former member of the Committee on Climate Change (CCC), and speakers will include Prof Jim Skea, who was co-chair of an IPCC working group, and Baroness Brown. The government to expected to formally ask the CCC for advice around 15 October. More details here:            https://eciu.net/events/2018/going-net-zero-on-climate-challenges-and-opportunities-for-the-uk Gebru Jember Endalew, the chair of the Least Developed Countries Group, one of the key negotiating blocks in climate talks representing the world's poorest countries, said: Communities across the world are already experiencing the devastating impacts of 1C global warming. Each fraction of a degree that global temperatures rise is extremely dangerous. Limiting global temperature increases to 1.5C means significantly decreased levels of food insecurity, water shortages, destruction of infrastructure, and displacement from sea level rise and other impacts. To the lives and livelihoods of billions, that half a degree is everything. Endalew said the report made clear that there is an urgent need to "accelerate the global response to climate change to avoid exceeding the 1.5C limit", adding: Governments must increase climate action now and submit more ambitious plans for the future. This includes increasing the level of support to developing countries to enable them to develop and lift their people out of poverty without going down a traditional, unsustainable development pathway. On the issue of loss and damage, Endalew said: This IPCC report confirms that loss and damage resulting from climate change will only worsen with further warming with much greater losses at 2C than at 1.5C. It is particularly vulnerable countries like the least developed countries that are worst affected by the devastating impacts of climate change and bear the greatest cost from the damage it causes, despite contributing the least to the problem. This injustice must be addressed by the international community through the provision of support for dealing with loss and damage. The most important message of this IPCC report is that achieving 1.5C is necessary, achievable and urgent. A safer, more prosperous future is possible with immediate action to implement transformative change across societies. There is a need to take advantage of the increasing availability of affordable, renewable and efficient energy solutions, rapidly reduce the use of fossil fuels, with coal phased out by mid-century, preserve and restore forests and soils, promote sustainable agriculture and implement other real climate solutions that together can bring about a zero-carbon economy. On the implementation guidelines for the Paris agreement that are due at COP24 in December 2018, he said: The IPCC report has made even clearer the need for the Paris rulebook to properly reflect the breadth of action required by all countries to achieve the agreement's 1.5C goal. Countries must deliver a robust rulebook that will ensure adequate action is taken to cut emissions, adapt to climate change and address loss and damage, and that support is provided to enable poorer countries to do the same. Dr Jo House, reader in environmental science and policy at the Cabot Institute, University of Bristol, said today's report underlines the need "to rapidly replace fossil fuel emissions with low-cost renewable energy technologies that are already widely available". She added: The report also highlights the urgent needs to protect forests and peatlands - these store more carbon than fossil fuel reserves, but also suck it out of the atmosphere, removing nearly a third of our current carbon dioxide emissions. Planting new forests can remove carbon from the atmosphere, as can using plants' biomass for energy with carbon capture and storage technology. Some scenarios rely on planting up to 700Mha of land to bioenergy crops - that's twice the size of India. To avoid relying on land for bioenergy mitigation, competing with food and nature, we have to address fossil fuel and industrial emissions. The IPCC will produce a special report on climate change and land next year to look further into land based mitigation and the co-benefits and tradeoffs. This is a good video from climate campaigner Bill McKibben (thanks for highlighting, @jessthecrip). He says although individual choices about how we live are important, it is only by coming together and forcing through real systemic change (100% renewable towns and cities, keeping carbon in the ground and divestment from fossil fuels) that climate breakdown can be avoided. There is no shortage of political opposition to meaningful climate action, from the US president, Donald Trump, to Brazil's far-right populist Jair Bolsonaro. And this morning Australia's prime minister, Scott Morrison, has put himself firmly in that category. Speaking before the IPCC report was released he said there was no money for "global climate conferences and all that nonsense". Here is the full story from my colleague Paul Karp. George Monbiot has written a powerful thread about the threat we face and what needs to be done: More from Labour's Rebecca Long-Bailey on Labour's commitment to tackling climate breakdown: Caroline Lucas, MP for and former leader of the Green party, said: This report couldn't be written in stronger terms: we are at a tipping point on the edge of complete climate breakdown, and governments around the world are failing to prevent it. Our own government is pushing us towards that tipping point with carbon intensive and ecologically destructive projects like airport expansion, fracking and HS2 - while slashing support for renewables and continuing to subsidise fossil fuels. Ministers have a choice: they can keep coating business-as-usual policies in a green veneer and watch as floods and heatwaves become the norm. Or they can embrace the opportunities to create a fairer, healthier, safer society that come with the economic overhaul we need. It is worth revisiting this piece from last week by my colleague George Monbiot, who argues that unless we kick our addiction to economic growth we can not meet the challenge posed by the unfolding climate breakdown. Given that economic growth, in nations that are already rich enough to meet the needs of all, requires an increase in pointless consumption, it is hard to see how it can ever be decoupled from the assault on the living planet. The Aldersgate Group, which represents some of the of the UK's leading businesses, said the report sets out clear opportunities for a zero-carbon economy. Nick Molho, executive director, said: This report from the world's leading climate scientists is clear that there are compelling environmental, economic and social benefits to limiting the increase in global temperatures to 1.5C as envisaged in the Paris agreement. Whilst achieving such a target will require challenging emission cuts across the economy, important progress has already been made and an increase in ambition would unlock a significant innovation and investment opportunity. He added: With strengths in areas such as offshore wind and electric vehicle manufacturing, energy efficient building design and green financial and legal services, UK businesses have a strong basis from which to accelerate emission cuts and be at the forefront of the development of the new clean technologies and services which the world economy will increasingly demand. Major economies now need to increase their existing emissions reduction pledges under the Paris agreement and adopt net zero-emissions targets in line with the conclusions of the IPCC report. The prime minister made the right call when she announced at the UN general assembly that the UK will be joining the Carbon Neutrality Coalition, especially as this follows growing public backing and cross-party support for a net zero target. The government must now begin work towards legislating for such a target in the UK, by rapidly acting on its commitment to seek the Committee on Climate Change's advice on how the UK can ensure its climate targets are aligned with the 1.5C goal. Backed by detailed policies, such a target would accelerate investment in ultra-low-emission goods, services and infrastructure and support the innovation needed to tackle emission cuts in more challenging sectors such as land management, agriculture, long-distance transport and heavy industry. Claire Perry, minister for energy, has put out a brief statement. This report should act as a rallying cry for governments around the world to innovate, invest, and raise ambition to avert catastrophic climate change. The UK has already shown carbon abatement and prosperity can go hand-in-hand and we lead the world in clean growth, slashing emissions by more than 40% since 1990 while growing our economy ahead of the G7. There is now no excuse and real action is needed. She added that in a "few days", during the "first-ever Green GB Week", the government will "outline our next steps to confront this global crisis". Jagoda Munic, director of Friends of the Earth Europe, said the message from the report was stark, and warned that Europe was not doing enough: The fossil fuel age has to end... To have any chance of avoiding the chaos, droughts and rising tides of 1.5C or more of global warming, we must massively and speedily transform our society to kick our fossil fuel addiction. Munic said a "safer, fairer and cleaner fossil-free" Europe was possible, with many communities already showing the way, from resisting dirty energy projects to installing community-owned renewable energy schemes. She said the EU is still planning to keep emitting carbon beyond 2050, and is currently only considering committing to "net zero emissions" by that year. She argued that as one of the regions most responsible for causing climate change, and most capable of responding, the EU needs to act at much greater speed and scale. The EU must do its fair share, beginning with completely stopping funding for fossil fuels and switching to 100% renewables by 2030. Currently the EU is far off track. Going to 'net zero' by 2050 is simply too late for Europe to stop burning carbon - and still it does not represent zero fossil fuels. Europe needs a completely fossil-free energy system by 2030. Friends of the Earth Europe is calling on the EU to: Urgently increase its climate ambition: increasing-short term targets to 100% renewables by 2030, and having a long-term vision in line with achieving 1.5C; Completely phase out financing and building more fossil fuel infrastructure, including gas, which shackles Europe to decades more fossil fuel use - including a fossil-free EU budget; Urgently increase investment in community renewables and energy savings and transform to 100% renewables based on a democratically owned energy system. Karin Nansen, chair of Friends of the Earth International, said: This is a climate emergency - for many around the world preventing climate catastrophe and temperature rises exceeding 1.5C is a matter of life and death. Only radical system change offers a pathway towards hope and out of despair. We want a just transition to a clean energy system that benefits people, not corporations. The Aldersgate Group, an alliance of leading business groups committed to sustainable economy, has welcomed the report. Here's a selection of what some of its prominent members have said: Steve Waygood, chief responsible investment officer, Aviva Investors: Keeping global temperature increases to 1.5C will help safeguard our investment portfolios and protect our customers savings. The long-term negative financial consequences of climate change are far, far greater than the short-term financial risks of transitioning to the Paris agreement. Today's report reiterates the need for policymakers to accelerate action to reduce carbon emissions and meet the agreed aims of the Paris agreement. Gabrielle Ginér, head of environmental sustainability at BT: Our target is to reduce the carbon emissions intensity of our operations by 87% by 2030 against a 2016/17 baseline. Pia Heidenmark Cook, chief sustainability officer at Ikea: We will contribute by decarbonising our energy use including electricity and heating, using zero-emissions deliveries, moving to a circular business model and enabling millions of customers and co-workers to take climate action in their everyday lives. Benet Northcote, director of corporate responsibility at John Lewis Partnership: We have already cut our operational emission intensity by nearly 70% since 2010 and over the coming months we will be unveiling the next stage in our plans to reduce our environmental impact and emissions even further. Waitrose and Partners continues to lead in its commitment to truly sustainable agriculture, while John Lewis and Partners is pioneering circular economy solutions that will lessen humanity's impact on the environment. Mike Barry, director of sustainable business at Marks and Spencer: We need to take bolder, faster action and shift our mind-set to one of embracing the inevitability and opportunity of the low-carbon economy. More from the Labour party on today's IPCC report. Rebecca Long-Bailey, Labour's shadow business, energy and industrial strategy secretary, who seems to be fronting a lot of the party's climate breakdown agenda, said the report makes clear that avoiding dangerous climate change will require "a transformational effort": That is precisely what Labour is offering - a plan to rapidly decarbonise our energy system as part of a green jobs revolution, and a long term target of net zero emissions before 2050. This would make the UK one of the few countries in the world on track to meet the Paris agreement goals. The Tories are way off course to meeting our existing climate targets, and every day this government remains in power the window of opportunity to tackle the climate crisis shrinks. It is a cruel irony that today we were also expecting the first horizontal shale fracking in the UK - an industry the government has pushed at the expense of local communities, air quality and our climate. Ben Backwell, chief executive of the Global Wind Energy Council, welcomed the report. He said: The IPCC report lays out the scale of the challenge and the opportunity ahead for the wind industry: renewables should supply 70-85% of electricity by 2050. We need to shoulder the responsibility and make this a reality along with our partners in solar photovoltaics and storage. Mary Robinson, former Irish president and a UN special envoy on climate, insisted the ambitious recommendations in the report are "doable". She told Today: "I do think this scientific report is going to be a change-maker. I'm a prisoner of hope, having learned from Archbishop Desmond Tutu, and I know how serious it is in the poorest countries, the climate issue. "Small island states are being devastated, but so are the Carolinas in the United States and Puerto Rico, etc. We have to become human again. We have to understand that we face an existential threat that is going to undermine the future prospects for our children and grandchildren. "It is doable." She added: "Before this, people talked vaguely about staying at or below 2C - we now know that 2C is dangerous. So it is really important that governments take the responsibility, but we must all do what we can." Robinson also backed campaigns to divest in oil companies and invest in renewable companies. And she urged the European Union to set an example by adopting a target for having zero-carbon emissions by 2050. She said: The richer parts of the world now have to really take seriously and do it the climate justice way. This puts the responsibility on all governments to have an intense dialogue now and to explain that we have 11 years until 2030 to safeguard the world for our children and grandchildren. Barry Gardiner, shadow minister for international climate change in the UK, described the report as a "wake-up call". Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he said it should be seen as opportunity for the UK, not a threat. He said: "We in the UK are incredibly well-placed - we've got the skills, we've got the technology, we've got the natural resources of wind and wave power to lead the world in this low-carbon revolution that is going to take place." But Gardiner struggled to answer whether a Labour government would outlaw burning wood pellets at the Drax power station in Yorkshire. "We must honour the must honour the commitments that have made but we must now look at the way in which we can transform the economy," he said. He accused Today's John Humphrys of "petty fogging" when challenged to put a price on Labour's programme to tackle climate change. 'Trump can't tear up international agreement on climate change' One of the report's authors has insisted that Donald Trump cannot derail the determination of the international community to cap global warming to 1.5C. Prof Jim Skea, co-chair of the IPCC working group behind the report, underlined the need for "unprecedented change" during an interview for BBC Radio 4's Today programme. But asked about Trump's threats to tear up international agreements on climate change, Skea said: "He can't tear up the agreement, all he can do is withdraw from it. There are very clear indications from almost every other country in the world that they are going to stick with it and in fact even compensate for any gaps led by the US." He added: "It needs big changes in all systems. Our energy systems need to change, our transportation systems - the way we manage land will become increasingly important if we are going to make a difference. "To keep below 1.5C, or pretty close to it, we would need to see cuts in carbon dioxide emissions globally of about 45% by 2030. That is why we were saying 'unprecedented change' and setting up the challenge for governments." A key point the IPCC has made before but which is underlined this time around: to address global warming we are going to have to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. If the world is to limit global warming to 1.5C, it is estimated somewhere between 100 and 1,000 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide will need to effectively sucked from the sky. This, to put it mildly, is an issue. Techniques that could be used to do it are unproven at scale and could carry significant risks. Some are basic withdrawal technologies - planting and cultivating more trees and crops - and relatively uncontroversial, though they require using land that could otherwise be employed to feed people. Much hope in IPCC circles has previously been placed in what is known as BECCS - bioenergy with carbon capture and storage. It basically involves growing trees and other vegetation to burn for electricity and then capturing the emissions released in power generation and storing it underground. Again, it would require a massive area to be meaningful - greater than the size of India, according to some research. It has been discussed for years but progress has been limited. The new report also mentions direct-air carbon capture and storage, a largely theoretical technique that uses large fans and chemicals to move and absorb carbon dioxide. Then there are proposed techniques that would not reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide but mask its effects. Governments have barely begun to consider how to regulate ocean fertilisation or "enhanced weathering" techniques, which both involve introducing chemicals into environment. Environment groups have generally resisted these approaches - there has been a not unreasonable argument that we must first cut emissions - but this is shifting. The Australian Conservation Foundation today called on governments and industry to not only reduce emissions but to urgently investigate how to remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. But these are debates that lie ahead. A landmark UN report from the intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) has delivered a dramatic and extraordinarily serious warning: We have little more than a decade to get global warming under control or the world is at risk. The report was delivered in Korea on Monday, and set out the impact of a rise in global temperatures of 1.5C above pre-industrialisation levels. Limiting warming to 1.5C is not impossible but will require unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society, and every bit of warming matters, the IPCC panel said. Current pledges by world governments are not enough to limit rises to 1.5C. The world is currently on a trajectory of 3 to 4C rises. The report mapped out four pathways to achieve 1.5C, with different combinations of land use and technological change. Reforestation, shifts to electric transport systems and greater adoption of carbon capture technology are all essential. We need to cut global emissions by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels. The world will need to be carbon neutral by the year 2047 if we are to have a 66% chance of limiting warming to 1.5C. To do that we have to source 70 to 85% of electricity from renewables within the next 32 years, put a price on greenhouse emissions, and remove carbon dioxide from Earth's atmosphere. The panel said they assessed feasibility factors including technology, physics and chemistry, but the willingness of government and institutions was out of the control of scientists. The difference between a rise of 1.5C and 2C was stark: At 1.5C there would be less extreme weather where people live, including extreme heat, rainfall, and drought. By 2100 sea level rises would be around 10cm lower than at 2C. All coral reefs would basically cease to exist at 2C, whereas at 1.5C there is a good chance of saving 10-30% of existing ecosystems. Species extinction would be lower, and there would be smaller reductions in the yields of key crops like maize, rice and wheat, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, south-east Asia, and South and Central America. The proportion of the global population exposed to global warming-induced water shortages would be up to 50% less than at 2C. Several hundred million fewer people would be exposed to climate change-related risk by 2050. The likelihood of an Arctic Ocean free of sea ice in summer would be once per century compared with at least once per decade. Government and corporate leaders must show they understand the science and step up to the challenge set today, Greenpeace says, but it's also up to the individual. "Every person has to do everything in their power to change course and follow the plan that is included in the IPCC report. Will we get there in time? Nobody knows," says Kaisa Kosonen, senior policy adviser at Greenpeace Nordic. "It's uncharted territory we're heading into. What matters now is that we decide to try and that we make it our absolute priority. Only then do we have a chance to protect ourselves from the devastating impacts that science says would start accelerating after 1.5C. "Those who say it's unrealistic are actually telling us to give up on people, to give up on species, to give up on our amazing planet. We will not accept this. " Mari Chang, climate and energy campaigner at Greenpeace East Asia, says change is already happening in Korea, where the report was launched today. "We're witnessing the beginning of the end of coal in Korea through game-changing decisions by Chungcheongnam-do to phase out coal and two South Korean pension funds to end coal financing," says Chang. "These decisions challenge the Moon government to also ramp up action in line with the Paris goals." "Burying our heads in the sand cannot be contemplated as an option any longer," says Glen Klatovsky, deputy chief executive of 350.org. "The climate crisis is here and already impacting the most vulnerable and the least responsible for creating it. The only way to achieve it is to stop all fossil fuel extraction and redirect the massive resources currently spent on the fossil fuel economy towards the renewable energy transition." The climate activist organisation said it was coordinating a global action to deliver copies of the report to institutions, demanding they end their support of the fossil fuel industry. It's a "critical moment", says Jonathan Watts. In that press conference earlier was the looming reality that there is a growing gap between what scientists are urging and what politicians are willing to do. We already know the US wants to pull out of the Paris agreement. Brazil has thrown support behind a presidential candidate who wants to do the same. Australia's prime minister has rejected calls from his party colleagues to join them but at the same time claims the country is on track to meet targets (spoiler: it's probably not). "This may be the dying kicks of the fossil-fuel industry and its political lobbyists," says Watts. "Or it could be the start of a seizure of power that will be fatal to climate stabilisation efforts. A critical moment." The panel was repeatedly asked if it was optimistic that its report would be acted on. It said yes, and that it looked at six conditions of feasibility: is it possible within the laws of physics and chemistry, do we have the technology, and what are the investment needs? Ther report could answer yes to those four but the final two - the capacity of government and institutions to act - were out of its hands. "We've done our job, we've passed the message on. It's their responsibility... whether they can act on it." The decisions taken by political leaders in the next few years will be crucial because the investment cycle for power plants and transport systems is at least 10 years, says Johan Rockström, chief scientist at Conservation International and co-author of the recent Hothouse Earth report. Infastructure built now will continue to burn up carbon for decades to come if it is not re-engineered. Rockström said the political shifts in some countries should be met with a counterbalancing move in others. "Every time we get leaders in the US or Brazil taking a step back then others, particularly in Europe, should take a step forward." Pep Canadell, the executive director of the Global Carbon Project, makes a good point - that this is likely to be the last reminder that the temperature rise can be limited to 1.5C if there is sufficient will. The report finds there are no biophysical or technical roadblocks to doing it, though he says the IPCC has misstepped by talking about what needs to be achieved decades down the line given governments don't respond to those timescales. He spells out what would need to happen, including the almost immediate establishment of a global carbon market, massive improvements in energy efficiency, recasting of people's diets, steps to reduce the expected peak global population and the immediate rollout of plans to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. "Importantly, all actions required are win-wins for society and cost less than the excess climate change damage." That's certainly one way of putting it. The Conversation has put together a great simplified explainer on the report "at a glance". Along with some handy graphs and charts, the article notes the world will need to be carbon-neutral by the year 2047 if we are to have a 66% chance of limiting warming to 1.5C. That chance drops to 50% if we take until 2058. To do that we have to source 70-85% of electricity from renewables within the next 32 years, put a price on greenhouse emissions, and remove carbon dioxide from Earth's atmosphere. Read the full explainer here. The Australian Academy of Science has put together a video about the report. Low-lying island nations, such as those across the Pacific, have been raising their concerns for many years as they are among the first to feel the "life and death issue" of rising sea levels. "Pacific Island nations have long maintained that we need "1.5 to stay alive'," said Maria Timon Chi-Fang, Pacific outreach officer for the Pacific Calling Partnership. "My home country of Kiribati is only two metres above sea level, and sea level rise is a life-or-death issue for us. Already with 1C of warming, we are seeing more frequent and damaging storms, the loss of our crop-growing lands and freshwater resources, and our homes flooded. "Many I-Kiribati are already resigned to having to leave home as life on the islands becomes untenable, and we know many of our Pacific neighbours are facing the same crisis. "We call on Australia and other big carbon polluters to give us a fair go at preserving our culture and having the dignified, safe and secure future that we deserve." Still in Australia, which I earlier noted was reportedly among nations to push back on elements of the report about a coal phase-out (the government denies this): Prime minister Scott Morrison - under fire for having recently abandoned a policy to cut emissions from electricity - said his government would "look at the report carefully" but claimed "only a year ago the same report said that the policies Australia has was right on the money". It isn't clear which report he was referring to - the special report is a one-off and the IPCC last published a major assessment in 2013-14. Morrison went on to say Australia was responsible for a little more than 1% of global emissions. There are a lot bigger players than us out there... emissions per capita in Australia are at their lowest level for decades... but at the end of the day we want to ensure electricity prices are lower. Australia, of course, is heavily reliant on coal, which the report says would basically need to be finished as an energy source by mid-century. The opposition leader Bill Shorten - according to opinion polls, favoured to take power at an election next year - said fossil fuels would not disappear but he wanted to see more renewable energy. He has promised it would deliver 50% of electricity by 2030, up from about 20% today. There's an interesting part of the report which relates to coral, and specifically the large-scale bleaching events which hit the Great Barrier Reef, off Australia's north-east coast, in recent years. The bleaching events were predicted, but came far sooner than expected, leading the report to conclude the research community had possibly underestimated the impact of global warming on coral. Adam Morton reports here that the difference between a rise of 1.5C instead of 2C is a matter of survival for the Great Barrier Reef. Today's report found that coral reefs were likely to decline between 70% and 90% if the temperature increased to 1.5C. Dire enough, to be sure, but if global warming reaches 2C, more than 99% of coral reefs were projected to decline. "Going to 2C and above gets to a point where corals can no longer grow back, or you have annual bleaching events," said Professor Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, a coordinating lead author on the report and a coral reefs expert with the University of Queensland. "On the other hand, at 1.5C there's still significant areas which are not heating up or not exposed to the same levels of stress such that they would lose coral, and so we're fairly confident that we would have parts of those ecosystems remaining." I am keeping one ear on the press conference as I bring you the international reaction to this report. The panel has just been asked if the fossil fuel industry was represented. Yes, in a word - the plenary sessions included observer organisations, and "they were in the room". Outside the press conference, the interim chief executive of the World Coal Association, Katie Warrick, tells us it believes there is still a future for coal. While we are still reviewing the draft, the World Coal Association believes that any credible pathway to meeting the 1.5C scenario must focus on emissions rather than fuel. That is why [carbon capture and storage] is so vital. Forecasts from the [International Energy Agency] and other credible experts continue to see a role for coal for the foreseeable future. Going into COP24, we will be campaigning for greater action on all low emissions technologies including CCS. The report has said fossil fuels, in particular coal, must be phased out. It's probably a good moment for me to re-up this quote from the panel earlier: "All options need to be exercised... We can make choices about how much of each option we use... but the idea you can leave anything out is impossible." And this: Ban Ki-moon, former United Nations secretary general: Equity, inclusivity and cooperation must underpin our collective response to meet the 1.5°C target, with states acting in the same spirit that led to the Paris agreement and the sustainable development goals. Climate change respects no borders; our actions must transcend all frontiers. Gro Harlem Brundtland, acting chair of the Elders, former prime minister of Norway: This report is not a wake-up call, it is a ticking time bomb. Climate activists have been calling for decades for leaders to show responsibility and take urgent action, but we have barely scratched the surface of what needs to be done. Further failure would be an unconscionable betrayal of the planet and future generations. Mary Robinson, former president of Ireland, former UN high commissioner for human rights and former UN special envoy on climate change: The IPCC report starkly sets out the challenges of securing a just transition to a 1.5C world, and the urgency with which this needs to be accomplished. This can only be done by a people-centred, rights-based approach with justice and solidarity at its heart. The time for talking is long past; leaders need to step up, serve their people and act immediately. Ricardo Lagos, former president of Chile, former UN special envoy on Climate Change: The threats posed by climate change to planetary health cannot be understated. The time for stating the scale of the problem has passed, and we now need to move to urgent, radical action to keep temperature rises to 1.5°C. It cannot be left to climate scientists and activists alone - it is a battle that must be joined by all those with an interest in our future survival. Ernesto Zedillo, former president of Mexico: If we allow temperatures to rise above 1.5°C then all the progress on prosperity, growth and development risks being wiped out. Our economic paradigm needs to shift to promote zero-carbon, climate-resilient policies. This means putting a price on carbon and investing in new, sustainable technologies, but also giving those most affected a voice in developing new growth models. Amjad Abdulla, chief negotiator for the Alliance of Small Island States, and IPCC board member: The report shows that we only have the slimmest of opportunities remaining to avoid unthinkable damage to the climate system that supports life as we know it. I have no doubt that historians will look back at these findings as one of the defining moments in the course of human affairs. I urge all civilised nations to take responsibility for it by dramatically increasing our efforts to cut the emissions responsible for the crisis and to do what is necessary to help vulnerable people respond to some of the devastating consequences we now know can no longer be avoided. The Trump administration is a "rogue outlier", says the former US vice president Al Gore. Responding to the IPCC report, Gore said the Paris agreement was "monumental" but now nations had to go further, and time was running out. "Solving the climate crisis requires vision and leadership. Unfortunately, the Trump administration has become a rogue outlier in its shortsighted attempt to prop up the dirty fossil fuel industries of the past. The administration is in direct conflict with American businesses, states, cities and citizens leading the transformation." The IPCC report is a wake-up call for slumbering world leaders," says Andrew Steer, president and CEO, World Resources Institute. "The difference in impacts between 1.5 and 2C of warming is large, and potentially game changing. And, the devastation that would come with today's 3-4C trajectory would be vastly greater. Each tenth of a degree matters - and tragically it's the poor who will be most affected." So is the 1.5C target feasible? That's the big early question. Professor Piers Forster from the University of Leeds is one of the lead authors of the Special Report chapter, which looks at the different "pathways" that governments could take. He tells me he is "exhausted but elated" the report was finished on time (one of the sessions went for 30 hours straight). Forster says the report "shows that limiting warming to 1.5C is barely feasible and every year we delay the window of feasibility halves. Nevertheless, if we were to succeed, we go on to show that benefits across society will be huge and the world will be all the richer for it. It's a battle worth winning." Here's something to understand. The report sets out four different "pathways" that governments could choose. As one of the IPCC co-chairs, Jim Skea, says, "it's possible within the laws of physics and chemistry ... It's up to the governments to decide that last step of feasibility." There is an absolute mountain of reaction coming through to the report. I'll bring it to you shortly. Here's a piece written by Nicholas Stern, IG Patel professor of economics and government and chair of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political Science. Stern authored the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change for the UK government. Human activities are currently emitting about 42bn tonnes of carbon dioxide every year, and at that rate the carbon budget - allowing us a 50-50 chance of keeping warming to 1.5C - would be exhausted within 20 years. Even 1.5C of warming would have brutal consequences, according to the report. Poor people, in particular, would suffer as the threat of food and water shortages increase in some parts of the world. But the report makes clear that allowing warming to reach 2C would create risks that any reasonable person would regard as deeply dangerous. Question: What did it feel like personally, as humans, compiling this report? "It's a tremendous collective endeavour." "There is space [to act] but the space is shrinking. We can still do it as a universal humanity, and I think that was the spirit of this." "The urgency of the issue is being seen because climate change is shaping the future of our civilisation. If action is not taken it will take the planet into an unprecedented climate situation [and] the scale of the changes humans would have to implement... is unprecedented... This report is a milestone in conveying that message." Some pretty direct statements coming from the panel towards the end of the press conference. The report shows we are at a crossroads, and what happens between now and 2030 is critical, especially for Co2 emissions. If we don't act now and have substantial reductions in emissions over the next decade we are making it very challenging to impossible to keep global warming to just 1.5C. Asked by a reporter about the difference in benefits of reforestation or carbon emission reductions, the panel has a stark response: The word "or" does not work in relation to reductions. The only linking word you can use is "and". "All options need to be exercised... We can make choices about how much of each option we use... but the idea you can leave anything out is impossible." One of the key questions repeatedly coming up is whether world governments will act on the report's warnings and recommendations. This observation is from our global environment editor, formerly Latin America correspondent. Question: What consumer aspects does the report tackle? What lifestyle changes can people make? Answer: The report is also clear that everyone has the means to act relating to daily choices. Energy demands and diets are both key parts of the pathways to reductions. The presentation is done, I'll now bring you some key Q&As from the floor. Question: Every IPCC report suggests greenhouse gases need to be reduced urgently. What's new about this report? Answer: The report is new in providing clear knowledge about differences in risks and impact from half a degree warning, with robust findings that weren't previously available. "It's very clear that half a degree matters." Question: How optimistic are you on a scale from one to 10? Answer: One thing the report did not aspire to do was assess feasibility. We identified six different conditions that needed to be met for 1.5C to be achievable. One of those was is it possible within the laws of physics and chemistry? Yes it is. Do we have the technology? What are the investment needs? But two things that can't be answered by scientists are the political and institutional feasibility. "We've done our job, we've passed the message on. It's their responsibility... whether they can act on it." Question: What about the US pulling out of Paris? Answer: This is a literature review, and we haven't found literature out there that looks at the implication of the US pulling out of Paris. We've sent a clear signal to collectivity countries, of which the US is still one. The report is clear that reducing emissions early on is needed to prevent overshoot. If we overshoot 1.5C global warning, then we would rely on carbon dioxide removal to go back. Early action to reduce emissions is possible - there are options are available. But there is an urgent need to accelerate. We earlier heard from the co-chairs of the report a summary of the differences between 1.5C and 2C temperature rises. Here's more from Adam Morton. A major point of the report, obviously enough, is to illustrate the difference between limiting warming to 1.5C and 2C by 2100. Sarah Perkins-Kirkpatrick, a research fellow at the Climate Change Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, has pulled together a good summary that we've adapted and expanded: All coral reefs would basically cease to exist at 2C, whereas at 1.5C there is a good chance of saving 10-30% of existing ecosystems. Sea level rise would be about 10cm less at 1.5C. This might not sound much, but it is significant - it would mean less salt water intrusion in low-lying islands, less loss of available land and up to 10 million fewer people being exposed to risks (based on 2010 population data). Heatwaves, which can be fatal to humans and play a part in wrecking ecosystems, would be less frequent and not last as long. Marine heatwaves would also not happen as frequently. More marine species would survive, and the impact on fisheries and aquaculture would be reduced. Tropical cyclones would carry less water, reducing the impact of floods. There is a good chance that droughts would be less severe, with obvious ramifications for food security and water availability. The overall impact on human health - in terms of the impact of vector-borne diseases, heatwaves and ozone depletion - would be reduced. The likelihood of an Arctic Ocean free of sea ice in summer would be once per century compared with at least once per decade. It is estimated it would prevent thawing over centuries of a permafrost area of 1.5 to 2.5m sq km. Permafrost thawing could trigger accelerated warming as greenhouse gases it has trapped are released. More species are likely to survive. At 1.5C, 4% of vertebrates, 6% of insects and 8% of plants are expected to lose over half the geographic range in which they can live. At 2C, it is 8% of vertebrates, 18% of insects and 16% of plants. However, these limits require changes on an "unprecedented scale". Rapid progress is being made in some areas but needs to be picked up in transport and land management. We need to start taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere in this century, using tree-planting, carbon capture and storage, land management, and other "novel approaches", but this has implications on food security and biosecurity. Current pledges by world governments are not enough to limit rises to 1.5C. More from the co-chairs: Since pre industrial times human activities have already caused about 1C of global warming. We're already seeing the consequences for people, nature and livelihoods. If the world continues to warm at the current rate, global temperatures are likely to reach 1.5C between 2030 and 2052. The differences limiting the rise to 1.5C intead of 2C include: There would be less extreme weather where people live, including extreme heat, rainfal, and drought. By 2100 sea level rises would be around 10cm lower than at 2C. Species extinction would be lower, and there would be smaller reductions in the yields of key crops like maize, rice and wheat, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, south-east Asia, and South and Central America. The proportion of the global population exposed to global-warming-induced water shortages would be up to 50% less than at 2C. Several hundred million fewer people would be exposed to climate-change-related risk by 2050. Limiting warming to 1.5C is not impossible but will require unprecedented transitions in all aspects of society, says Hoesung Lee. Every bit of warming matters, he says, before handing over to co-chairs. The current global state-of-play as described in the report: Human activities have caused about 1C of global warming since pre-industrial times (expressed as a likely range of 0.8-1.2C). We are seeing the effects of this through increased extreme weather, rising sea levels, coral bleaching and shrinking Arctic sea ice, among other changes. We're likely to reach 1.5C warming sometime between 2030 and 2052 on the current path. The effects of this warming would be materially and noticeably different from today. It would be worse again at 2C and higher temperature rises. To limit warming to 1.5C we need to cut global emissions by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels. Scientists say it could be done but it would require rapid action now. It would mean significant changes in all sectors of society. We would also need to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The chair of the IPCC, Hoesung Lee, is now addressing media on what he calls "one of the most important reports" produced by the IPCC, and "certainly one of the most keenly awaited". He says previous reports gave governments a clear understanding of the implications of 2C warming, but there was "relatively little" about 1.5C. This is the first time in IPCC's history that all three working groups worked together to produce the report, which was put together in a very short amount of time, what he calls a "Herculean effort". The report is public. "It's a line in the sand and what it says to our species is that this is the moment and we must act now," says Debra Roberts, a co-chair of the working group on impacts. "This is the largest clarion bell from the science community and I hope it mobilises people and dents the mood of complacency." Read our full report from our global environment editor Jonathan Watts here. The authors of the landmark report say urgent and unprecedented changes are needed to reach the target, which they say is affordable and feasible although it lies at the most ambitious end of the Paris agreement pledge to keep temperatures between 1.5C and 2C. The half-degree difference could also prevent corals from being completely eradicated and ease pressure on the Arctic, according to the 1.5C study, which was launched in Incheon in South Korea after approval at a final plenary of all 195 countries that saw delegates hugging one another, with some in tears. The IPCC press conference will start in a few minutes, and I'll bring you updates. We'll also have extensive reporting and analysis on the report itself. In the meantime, here's a recent piece on the possibility of the Earth becoming a "hothouse". As things stand, if you add up all the things that the 190-plus countries have committed to do as part of that Paris deal, global temperatures will probably go well above 3C, writes Graham Readfearn. We're already at 1C of warming, so the extra half a degree isn't far away - many scientists will say it's already locked in, while others say there are plausible ways to stabilise temperatures at that level. But in August, one of the world's leading scientific journals - the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences - published a "perspective" article that has become known as the "hothouse Earth" paper. There was no new science in the paper and while it was speculative, it did raise fundamental questions about the ability of governments around the world to stop the Earth from spiralling into a "hothouse". Some information on the report itself, outlined by chair of the IPCC, Hoesung Lee, in a speech last week (pdf). It was commissioned as part of the Paris agreement in 2016, the IPCC was invited to prepare a report assessing the impacts of 1.5C warming and related emissions pathways. At that time, relatively little was known about the risks avoided in a 1.5C world compared with a 2C warmer world, or about the pathway of greenhouse gas emissions compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5C. In February 2017 the panel announced 91 authors and review editors, from 40 countries. There are 133 contributing authors. The final report contains more than 6,000 cited references. The first order draft attracted almost 13,000 comments from about 500 experts across 61 countries. The second order draft attracted more than 25,000 comments from 570 experts and officials in 71 countries. The final government draft received almost 4,000 comments from government, bringing the total amount of comments to 42,000, each of which must be addressed by the authors. Politically, the issue of global warming and how to address it is in a much more precarious situation than when this report was commissioned in 2016. Donald Trump has pledged to withdraw the US from the Paris accord. The Australian government - currently coming through another bout of leadership instability - has also flagged withdrawing. It was already failing its targets. Jair Bolsonaro, who today won the first round of voting in the presidential election in Brazil, has also pledged to withdraw from the Accord and to open up the Amazon for agribusiness. On the other side are low-lying island nations already feeling the impact of rising sea levels. The Marshall Islands has announced a plan to reach net zero emissions by 2050. "If we can do it, so can everyone else," said president Hilda Heine. In a little under an hour, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will be releasing its highly anticipated special report on global warming of 1.5C. The news is not good, with the report - based on more than 6,000 scientific works - expected to warn that the world is nowhere near on track to reach its targets unless there is drastic, world-changing action immediately. That means a massive transformation in the way the world generates energy - phasing out fossil fuels and coal in particular, as well as how it uses transportation and grows food. "It's extraordinarily challenging to get to the 1.5C target and we are nowhere near on track to doing that," co-author Drew Shindell, a Duke University climate scientist, told the Guardian last month. There were reports of pushback during the drafting, including from Japan, South Korea, Poland, Estonia and Australia. Australia, where the government is extraordinarily pro-coal, is currently debating withdrawing from the Paris agreement and is the world's largest coal exporter. Its environment minister denied the claims. The world has already warmed 1C, and the 2015 Paris agreement saw countries agree to curb rises to 2C above pre-industrialisation levels and to pursue efforts to limit the increase to 1.5C.54814falsefalseA Nasa satellite photo showing the extent of sea ice in the Arctic. The latest IPCC climate change report says unprecedented action is needed to keep global temperature rises to 1.5C.Drax in north Yorkshire - Britain's biggest power stationJim Skea

Load-Date: October 8, 2018


End of Document




Global climate strike: Greta Thunberg and school students lead climate crisis protest - as it happened; Millions of people from Sydney to Manila, Dhaka to London and New York are marching for urgent action on climate breakdownWhy the Guardian is changing its environment languageHow you can get involved | Are you taking part in today's protests?Please support the Guardian's independent journalism
The Guardian(London)
September 19, 2019 Thursday 11:31 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:51
Length: 67379 words
Byline: Maanvi Singh, Mark Oliver, Haroon Siddique, and Naaman Zhou
Body


block-time published-time 1.52am BST 
 Summary     An estimated quarter of a million people marched in New York to protest government inaction on the climate crisis. Photograph: Peter Foley/EPA   
For the past 24 hours, the Guardian has been reporting in real time as millions of people joined in a worldwide, youth-led climate strike - with correspondents filing dispatches from the demonstrations across the globe.
We're ending our liveblog here , but not our commitment to covering the climate crisis. 
Read our roundup of the historic day of action: 
 Related:  Across the globe, millions join biggest climate protest ever
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.03am BST
block-time published-time 1.30am BST 
  A moment of appreciation for the doggos 
These puppers want action on climate change right now. And maybe also a treat, please?
    "For my extinct friends" reads this Mexico City dog's sign. Photograph: Marco Ugarte/Associated Press     
enltrThis dog gets it. Climate strike in San Francisco pic.twitter.com/URVintNKlD
 - Michael Kan (@Michael_Kan) September 20, 2019
enltrI'm scared about our government's lack of meaningful climate action too, doggo! #ClimateStrike           #Melbourne           pic.twitter.com/y0ZJCBXYZj
 - Danielle Jewson (@danismellelise) September 20, 2019      'We do not have voice nor vote... you do' says a pup in Bogota, Colombia. Photograph: Mauricio Dueñas Castañeda/EPA     
enltr #ClimateStrike           #Hobart           #TasmaniaClever doggo            pic.twitter.com/j5OXXQkf7A
 - Leah Galvin ?????????????????? (@leah_galvin) September 20, 2019      Rico is barking mad about the climate crisis in London. Photograph: Helen William/PA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.37am BST
block-time published-time 12.57am BST 
  Thousands of tech employees walked out of their workplaces to join the climate strike 
Workers from Microsoft, Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Twitter staged walkouts in what may be the largest coordinated worker action in the history of the tech industry. 
At the demonstration in Seattle, more than 3,000 tech workers walked out of their workplaces on Friday and thousands more joined actions across the country, according to Amazon Employees for Climate Justice, a group calling for Amazon to make more effort to address climate change. 
enltrSeattle tech workers are out here!! #TechClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/x8nIzSDyzO
 - Google Workers for Action on Climate (@GoogleWAC) September 20, 2019
Globally, more than 1,800 Amazon employees walked out across 25 cities and 14 countries on Friday to protest the company's failure to take more action to address the climate crisis. 
Jeff Bezos, Amazon's CEO, has made some efforts to address climate concerns, including an announcement on Thursday that the company expects to be carbon neutral by 2040 and a February announcement of a goal, known as Shipment Zero, to be carbon neutral on 50% of shipments by 2030. 
But workers are asking for more: zero emissions by 2030, increasing the number of electric vehicles in its fleet, and refusing to set contracts with companies that damage the climate. 
"Amazon still has a long way to go," said Danilo Quilaton, product designer at Amazon in San Francisco. "What kind of climate leader can we be if we're still partnering with fossil fuel companies, selling our AI technologies to extract oil faster?"
enltrHere we go! We're marching side-by-side with @TwtAction for            #ClimateStrike.            pic.twitter.com/Bne4UdMfxX
 - Square Workers for Climate Action (@SquareWorkers) September 20, 2019
Other tech companies were present at marches in San Francisco and beyond. Twitter workers walked out, marching alongside workers from tech payment firm Square in San Francisco. Facebook workers walked out of offices around the country, including employees who left the headquarters in San Jose. 
enltrTwitter, Amazon, and Google workers marching together for climate justice! ?????? pic.twitter.com/JTQgT3968i
 - Tech Workers Coalition (@techworkersco) September 20, 2019
More than 1,800 workers at Google signed a pledge supporting climate action from the company, including zero emissions by 2030, eliminating contracts with oil and gas companies, and promising zero harm to climate refugees. Hundreds walked out of Google offices across the US, including in New York City and at the headquarters in San Jose. 
"As individuals, we may feel alone in facing climate change," the Google petition said. "But if we act together - if we act now - we can build a better future." 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.18am BST
block-time published-time 12.53am BST 
  Amazon workers join the climate strike 
Hundreds of Amazon workers left their desks Friday to join a thousands-strong climate strike march in Seattle. 
Workers rallied in front of Amazon's focal point - the Amazon Spheres, geodesic glass terrariums marking the company's center of gravity in downtown Seattle - before marching to city hall. The mood was light, their march well ordered and rife with signage playing on Amazon slogans, including "Customer Obsessed = Climate Obsessed". Those gathered joked that they were skipping a lunch at their desks to join the noontime protest.
 The grim realities of the climate crisis were mentioned, particularly the challenges facing Amazon warehouse workers in southern California, but the 2,000-or-so workers and throngs of supporters were prepared to celebrate. They'd won, after all, Amazon's first broad pledge to contain its carbon footprint. 
    "It was important to be part of the fight," said Amazon worker Evan Pulgino. Photograph: Levi Pulkinnen/The Guardian   
 EVAN : Bobbing along with a stream of colleagues, Evan Pulgino was awestruck. 
Pulgino, a software engineer from Pittsburgh who arrived in Seattle three years ago to work at Amazon, was a face in the crowd of several thousand Amazon and Google employees and their supporters. Badges colored to mark seniority, standard at Amazon, hung from lanyards and fobs. 
Having set out from the Amazon Spheres in downtown Seattle, the tech crowd merged with throngs of high schoolers arriving on Fifth Avenue to join the march on Seattle's City Hall. Pulgino described the disparate mass of humanity - Amazon's orderly herd of 20s and 30-somethings mixing with exuberant teens - as "incredible".
Pulgino, who has been active on climate issues since October, said he was cheered by the commitment made Thursday by Amazon to attain zero net carbon emissions by 2040. It was a start, he said, and a heartening one. Pulgino objected to Amazon's continued financial support for climate change-denying thinktanks and politicians, and to Amazon Web Services' contracts with fossil fuel companies.
"It was important to be part of the fight," said Pulgino, carrying a sign that read "Stop funding climate denial, start leading for zero emissions".
"Tech drives so much change," the 38-year-old continued. "If Amazon leads the way, other companies will follow."
enltrLet's raise the bar, not the temperature! #ClimateStrike           #AMZNClimate           pic.twitter.com/dvCMo22Hcf
 - Amazon Employees For Climate Justice (@AMZNforClimate) September 20, 2019
 ROSHNI : Roshni Naidu, a five-year Amazon veteran, expected something out of Finding Nemo when last year she traveled to Australia to take in the Great Barrier Reef. Naidu, 28, was shocked to find a graying, vacant space. 
 "It was nothing at all like what I expected," said Naidu, a senior technical product manager. 
Returning to Seattle shaken by witnessing the degradation of the planet, Naidu got to work at her work. She began agitating with other Amazon employees for the company to get it right on climate change.
Amazon, she said, can lead on climate. She described herself as "cautiously celebratory" after company leaders announced a suite of climate change-related reforms aimed at eliminating Amazon's carbon footprint by 2040. 
"It's a sign that collective action works," Naidu said. Friday's march, she added, "puts even more pressure on Amazon to do more."
It's great, she said, to be able to say she's "saving the world".
    Nick Andrews, a program manager at Amazon, was a chant leader for the climate strike in Seattle. Photograph: Levi Pulkinnen/The Guardian   
 NICK: Milling among his climate activist colleagues, Nick Andrews, a program manager now in his sixth year at Amazon, was ready to scream. Which, as a chant leader, was his job for the afternoon. 
Andrews, 32, had been active for months pushing Amazon to reduce its climate footprint and cut ties to the fossil fuel industry. Like several of his colleagues, he struck a tone more disappointed than angry. Amazon workers tend to believe their company can do anything, including save the planet.
At the outset, Andrews said, pushing the sometimes autocratic company seemed like it would be nerve-racking work. It didn't turn out that way. 
"Everyone came in with trepidation," Andrews said. "But it's really received a company-wide embrace."
It helps, he said, that he and other Amazonians turn out - unsurprisingly to those who've watched the company come to dominate the retail economy and cloud computing - to be "very good organizers".
He celebrated on Thursday when Amazon leaders announced a series of steps designed to eliminate Amazon's net carbon footprint. He looks forward to Amazon doing more, though.
"We pride ourselves on being a bar-pushing company," Andrews said. "This is a good start, but I think we can do better."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.09am BST
block-time published-time 12.42am BST 
The Guardian has partnered with Friends of the Earth to highlight the climate crisis and raise funds for the charity, which is doing so much to address the damage that has been done and continues to be done to the planet.
 Related:  The Art of Activism: buy a sustainable print and tote bag to support Friends of the Earth
block-time published-time 12.29am BST 
  Scenes from Richmond, California - a town under Chevron's shadow     Richmond protesters: "We're here to fight." Illustration: Susie Cagle/The Guardian   
The main climate strike action in the Bay Area today was in the center of San Francisco, always a magnet for regional progressive activism. But across the bay, Richmond, population 110,000, more than held its own. 
The small crowd at the city's civic center peaked at about 100 before a short youth-led march. Speakers took turns addressing the group from atop a park bench, rallying with call-and-response chants and songs, and impromptu speeches about factory farming, a Green New Deal and geoengineering. But while this may have been a small branch of a global day of action, the main thrust here was local issues, as residents shared updates on local organizing efforts to stop the climate pollution happening in their own town.
    "Richmond stong, coal is wrong" Illustration: Susie Cagle/The Guardian   
Richmond is actually younger than the 117-year-old, 2,900 acre Chevron oil refinery that occupies much of the city's scenic bayside hillscape, and the fossil fuel giant has long exerted outsized influence not just over the city's environment, but also its politics. Richmond also feels the impact of over a million tons of coal and petroleum byproducts exported from its bayside terminal each year - the city's asthma rates are far above those of other Bay Area communities. 
    "Stoms surge and fires burn, but do you hear the call?" Photograph: Susie Cagle/The Guardian   
Urgency on the global climate crisis won the day worldwide, but in Richmond and other front-line cities, the impacts of the fossil fuel industry and issues of environmental justice feel even more immediately dire. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36am BST
block-time published-time 12.13am BST 
  'It is like they are burning our soul': Brazil's indigenous people call for international help    Tereza Arapiun, an indigenous leader from Pará state attends the climate strike demonstration in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: Dom Phillips/The Guardian   
At the third Rio de Janeiro demonstration of the day, Tereza Arapiun, a chief from the Arapiun tribe from the Amazon state of Pará, called for international help for Brazil's indigenous people. "We are surrounded by destruction, loggers and mining," she said. "We need help."  
Amazon deforestation, fires and land invasions worsened under Brazil's President Jair Bolsonaro, she said. "He encourages it. Before, there was protection. He destroyed it."
Arapiun welled up as she told how a friend described hearing the screams of dying animals as fires raged recently near Alter do Chão, a renowned beauty spot in the same state. "It is very painful. It is like they are burning our soul," she said. "We need help - and help won't come from Brazil."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.30am BST
block-time published-time 11.57pm BST 
  Colombian demonstrators demand a world "without plastic and without war"    People take part in a Global Climate Strike rally in Bogotá, Colombia. Photograph: Luisa González/Reuters   
Demonstrators have begun to gather at parks and squares across Colombia now. Here in Bogotá - the capital - the historic Plaza de Bolívar in front of the congress building is slowly drawing crowds despite the rain. 
"Colombia, our land," one group of students chanted as they arrived. "Without plastic and without war!"
Near the statue of the country's independence hero Simón Bolívar, demonstrators banged drums and burnt incense, waving signs that read "Rebel or burn out".
"When the problem is as urgent as climate change, it's only by coming together that we can make a difference," said Alejandra Moreno, a student from Bogotá. 
In Bogotá, a dog wears a placard reading, "We do not have voice nor vote... You do."Photograph: Luisa González/Reuters
Unlike many similar events around the world, this one was not preceded by a major strike and schools were open as normal. This could be because events got little publicity in local media. The two main dailies, El Espectador and El Tiempo, ran agency-written stories online on worldwide strikes that did not once mention Colombia.
Instead, the mantle to promote today's march was picked up by an opposition political party, Colombia Humana, and local environmental activists. Both used social media extensively.
"Why in London are people so willing to move to pressure their government and the world for drastic measures to attack the climate crisis and not in Colombia, if the problem is the same?" the senator Gustavo Petro - the leader of Colombia Humana and a former presidential candidate - tweeted this morning. "Because of something called asymmetrical information: in Colombia the danger is ignored."
Colombia has made efforts to position itself as a regional leader on environmental issues, recently hosting a summit in its Amazonian city Leticia, where Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru agreed on measures to tackle the nearby raging rainforest fires.
 However, local activists say it is just window-dressing given that Colombia remains one of the most dangerous countries for environmentalists. Twenty-four environmental activists were murdered here in 2018, second only to the Philippines, according to the watchdog Global Witness.
"Colombia is living through constant threats of damage to ecosystems and deforestation, and our cities are heating up," said Isabel Cristina Zuleta, an environmental activist with the Rios Vivos movement, who has received many death threats for her work. She was attending a march in Medellín, Colombia's second largest city. 
"In Colombia, to protest and to march is to put yourself at risk," Zuleta said. "That's why today it is so important to see people in the streets."
Updated at 12.17am BST
11.52pm BST
Protesters in Miami Beach wrap it up, head to "End of the World" after partyStudents protest outside city hall in Miami Beach.Photograph: Lynne Sladky/Associated Press
The climate strike has wrapped up in Miami Beach after a "historic" day that saw thousands of schoolchildren, college students and workers gather at two events at city hall. But organizers say this is just the start of something much bigger.
"You saw how many people were here, it was incredible," said youth climate activist John Paul Mejia, who spoke at the morning school strike and evening rally for those who couldn't take time off during the day.
"Now we need to keep the conversation going, to build on this historic day and get things done."
The Miami protestors were heading for an after-strike party with live music at a bar in nearby Overtown arranged by 350southflorida, an environmental group.
The relaxation will be short, however. Next week's planned protest activities include a sit-in at Miami Beach's sustainability committee meeting and a strike in downtown Miami at Chase Bank, which 350southflorida says is the world's biggest funder of fossil fuels.
 The "week of action" wraps up with an End of the World party on the second Global Climate Strike day next Friday.
Updated at 12.10am BST
11.39pm BST
Young activists in Brazil: less CO2, more vida
Thalita Alves, 20, left, and Gabriela Cunha, 18, from Federal Fluminense University demonstrate Friday on the steps of the state legislature in Rio de Janeiro.Photograph: Dom Phillips/The Guardian
There were small demonstrations across Brazil on Friday. In the morning, dozens of school and university students occupied the steps of Rio de Janeiro's state legislature in hot sun. They sang, waved placards and called for the removal of business-friendly environment minister Ricardo Salles.
Striking high school student Maria Hardman, 15, was angry over far-right president Jair Bolsonaro's failure to protect the Amazon. "He does not value the environment," she said. "Bolsonaro is an imbecile. He does not represent me."
Brazilians have yet to grasp the scale of the climate emergency, said Mariana Império, 30, a masters student at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. 
Thalita Alves, 20, a trainee teacher at the Federal Fluminense University, said  people began waking up when fires in the Bolivian Amazon caused São Paulo skies to darken. "Brazilians who voted for Bolsonaro ... faithfully believe what he says," she said. Later another demonstration marched from Ibama, the environmental agency, to the city centre.
Demonstrators hold a "Global strike for climate" banner during a protest on climate change in São Paulo, Brazil.Photograph: André Penner/Associated Press
High school students formed a human mosaic reading: "Save the Amazon" in Recife and held up            placards with data on Amazon fires in Salvador. Students marched in the town of Novo Friburgo and in the capital Brasília, an SOS Amazon banner was hung on the walls of the environment ministry.
In the Amazon city of Belém, hundreds gathered beside the Marajó Bay. "Coming from the Amazon, I feel it's a duty to fight," said Lidia Seabra, 24, studying a masters in biology at the Federal University of Pará. "We are united here to defend the Amazon," said engineering student Devyison de Jesus, 21.
In São Paulo, a few thousand blocked Paulista Avenue after cheering speeches from children such as Cora Ramos, 10, who held up a placard she had made that read "there is no planet B". "If we destroy this one, there won't be another," she said.
Brazilian activists were also present at marches abroad. Alessandra Munduruku, an indigenous activist from the Munduruku tribe of Pará state, made a short, powerful speech to an enormous crowd in Berlin. "My people are grateful to have good people fighting and defending the Amazon," she said through a translator to deafening cheers.
 "I saw many children, many young people, parents, old people, I thought that demonstration was very beautiful," she told the Guardian. "I had goosebumps."
Updated at 12.07am BST
11.19pm BST
Mexico City protestors to AMLO: " We want a future, not hydrocarbons!"A woman with a placard that reads in Spanish "This is not an ice cream it is your home, take care of it."Photograph: Hector Vivas/Getty Images
Climate protests started early outside the National Palace in central Mexico City, where President Andrés Manuel López Obrador usually holds a daily press conference. The president - commonly called AMLO - was instead in the state of Yuctán on Friday and didn't speak of the climate issue. But he boasted, "The fall in [Mexican] petroleum production has stopped and we're starting to produce more petroleum.... We're now producing more petrol in Mexico's refineries."
AMLO has bet big on boosting Mexico's petroleum output and promised to lower the price of gasoline. He's also pushed ahead with plans to build an $8bn refinery in the state of Tabasco - even starting construction prior to completing the environmental permits. AMLO also cancelled an electricity auction, which would have allowed more renewable energy into the market, and the Federal Electricity Commission (CRE) has announced plans to            instead burn more coal.
 "There a campaign that renewables are cheaper and it's a lie," CFE director Manuel Bartlett said earlier this year.
 The government's focus on fossil fuels has put in question the country's commitment to generate 35% of its energy with renewables by 2024, according to climate change analysts.
Marchers in Mexico City targeted AMLO, chanting, "We want a future, not hydrocarbons!"
Updated at 11.30pm BST
11.05pm BST
Greta Thunberg: "Change is coming whether they like it or not." Swedish teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg arrives at the podium to speak as she takes part during the Climate Strike in New York.Photograph: Eduardo Muñoz/AP
The crowd in Battery Park roared in anticipation of Greta Thunberg, who was introduced by Alexandria Villaseñor, Thunberg's NYC equivalent who her spends her Fridays protesting outside the UN headquarters in New York City.
 "Greta! Greta! Greta!" the crowd chanted as Thunberg got on the stage. 
The 16-year-old started her speech off by marking the number of people who participated in the strike around the world. In New York City, 250,000 people marched. Worldwide, more than 4m demonstrated. 
 Thunberg's directed her speech to the hundreds of students in the crowd, though she acknowledged that adults also skipped worked to strike. 
"We will do everything in our power to stop this crisis from getting worse, even if it means skipping school or work, because this is more important," Thunberg said. "Why should we study for a future that is being taken away from us?"
Thunberg had to pause her speech twice to point out that people in the crowd needed medical attention. Many people had been in the sun all afternoon waiting for Thunberg to speak. The crowd patiently waited for Thunberg to start speaking again, each time cheering when she continued.
Thunberg elicited laughter when she described all the politicians she had met who asked for selfies and "tell us they really, really admire what we do" yet have done nothing to address the climate crisis. "We demand a safe future. Is that really to much to ask?" 
"No!" the crowd shouted back. 
At the end of her speech, Thunberg emphasized that the strikes around the world are just the start of change.
 "If you belong to that small group of people who feel threatened by us, we have some very bad news for you, because this is only the beginning," Thunberg said. "Change is coming whether they like it or not." 
 Students in the crowd said they felt moved seeing Thunberg speak in person. 
 "I started crying. I just found it powerful and empowering," said Juliana Rubiano, 16. "She represents a lot of people, and that's us, that's the youth." 
Updated at 11.19pm BST
10.43pm BST
Californians are no strangers to the climate crisis fight - and now they're taking on the federal governmentYoung activists and their supporters hold signs as they march Friday during a Global Climate Strike demonstration in San Francisco.Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
California is not a place that requires convincing that the climate is changing. The people here don't even need to see the science - they're feeling the impacts firsthand, as the state teeters between an eroding coastline and growing            wildland fires. 
Perhaps because of its many vulnerabilities, California has taken arguably the strongest stance of any US state in fighting the climate crisis, at times also fighting with the federal government in the process. When the Trump administration moved to undo California's strict vehicle emissions standards this month, the state vowed to fight. Governor Gavin Newsom hit back with, of course,            a tweet : "We will prevail. See you in court." 
Earlier this week, the University of California pledged to divest over $80bn in endowment and pension funds from fossil fuel companies, citing the "financial risk" posed by the industry, compared to renewable energy. Climate advocates called it the biggest single commitment by any university, and perhaps the beginning of a new divesting trend. 
California cities, including Berkeley and San Jose, are leading the country with a wave of local laws to phase out natural gas hook-ups in new construction, despite strong and well-funded            opposition from the gas industry. Natural gas is the greatest source of carbon emissions from buildings, while fully electrifying homes and businesses could allow them to run on clean, renewable energy instead. 
California's municipalities have also taken direct aim at the industry responsible for so much of the climate crisis. Eight cities and counties in the state have filed civil lawsuits against fossil fuel companies, alleging public nuisance and in some cases negligence. The suits seek billions of dollars in damages to help mitigate climate impacts. 
Updated at 11.08pm BST
10.26pm BST
Young activists in San Francisco, California.Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Maanvi Singh, here - taking up the Guardian's live climate strike coverage from the West Coast. 
Coming up, West Coast environment correspondent Susie Cagle will be sharing sketches and scenes from the  demonstration in Richmond, California,  across the bay from San Francisco. A Chevron refinery older than the town itself looms over it, and the area is home to some of the boldest climate-minded activism in California. 
I'm heading to cover the climate strike in Richmond today. The crowd will be smaller than in SF or Berkeley, but Richmond has been home to some of the most exciting and effective environmental organizing for 15+ years now, all in the shadow of a 100-year-old Chevron refinery.
- Susie Cagle (@susie_c) September 20, 2019
Technology reporter Kari Paul will be following up on climate walkouts at Amazon, Twitter, Facebook and Google.
And Los Angeles correspondent Sam Levin will bring us dispatches from the protests in southern California. 
Updated at 11.11pm BST
10.00pm BST
Mexico City protests: thousands take to the streets
Thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets of Mexico City to join the global climate strike this afternoon. "Se ve, se siente, la tierra está caliente," the crowds shouted as they processed down the city's main avenue, Reforma towards its presidential palace. "You see it, you feel it. The earth is getting hotter." Protesters - many of them school children and teenagers - carried homemade banners reading: "There's no money in a dead earth" and "Action now!" One placard            urged demonstrators to make love, not CO2.
People march along Reforma Avenue with signs during a climate protest in Mexico CityPhotograph: Alfredo Estrella/AFP/Getty Images
There were reports of other demonstrations, big and small, across Mexico in cities including Acapulco, Irapuato, Guadalajara and Tijuana. Unlike in Brazil, where far-right president Jair Bolsonaro has ignored today's movement, the protests received the blessing of the Mexican government which            tweeted its support. In a Twitter video Victor Toledo, Mexico's environment secretary, urged the country to reflect on the environment "insurgency" taking place around the world and to take action where possible. 
People hold a flag as they take part in a Global Climate Strike rally in Mexico CityPhotograph: Carlos Jasso/Reuters
9.48pm BST
'There is no Planet B'
Best friends Amaya Mejia, 10, and Scarlett Harrison, 11, skipped school together to join the Miami Beach youth climate strike, after staying up late the night before to craft their placards. Amaya opted for a globe with the simple message: "There is no Planet B". 
"You need to listen to us, it's the only planet we've got and we need to protect it," said Amaya, who attends the Gulliver private school in Coral Gables.
Messages on banners ranged from simple and effective like Amaya's, to the deeply political and often comical. "The government can regulate my uterus but not single-use plastics?" read one.
Best friends Amaya Mejia, 10, and Scarlett Harrison, 11, stayed up late last night to make their placards for the Miami Beach #schoolstrike4climate.            @GuardianUS           #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/4LTIFHNdEB
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
Another student held aloft a sign informing the crowd: "I'm not showing up for school because adults aren't showing up for children," while another said: "You'll die of old age, I'll die of climate change."
More locally-themed placards, referencing the threat of sea level rise to Miami Beach, a hugely popular tourism destination, included one that read: "Take a stand before our city is all sand."
My favorite, however, was perhaps the most understated message of the day. "I'm very upset," it read.
9.34pm BST
Covering Climate Now 
Covering the climate crisis is absolutely core to the Guardian's editorial mission. 
And all this week, we have been a lead partner in Covering Climate Now, an initiative founded earlier this year with the            Columbia Journalism Review and            the Nation. 
Covering Climate NowPhotograph: Covering Climate Now/The Guardian
This has led to more than 250 newsrooms representing 32 countries - with a combined monthly reach of more than a billion people - signing on to amplify and share content on climate change. 
There has been a burst of coverage this week on the Guardian and beyond ahead of the UN climate summit next week on Monday 23 September. 
Check out some of our pieces this week including: 
    • The silenced: meet the climate whistleblowers muzzled by Trump
    • The sinking class: the New Yorkers left to fight the climate crisis alone
    • How TV weathercasters became the unsung heroes of the climate crisis
    • 'Like a sunburn on your lungs': how does the climate crisis impact health?
9.10pm BST
Thousands of people are striking in Boston, Massachusetts
Organizers expected some 10,000 people to rally at City Hall Plaza for the Boston Climate Strike organized by youth climate activists.
Boston City Councilor Michelle Wu and former Environmental Protection Agency head Gina McCarthy were among scheduled speakers, according to NBC10 Boston.
Students chant and carry signs on the Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston, Massachusetts.Photograph: Cj Gunther/EPA
Updated at 9.14pm BST
8.54pm BST
Miami striker: 'Does it matter if we're under 15 feet of water or 50 feet?'Students cheer during a protest organized by the US Youth Climate Strike outside of Miami Beach City Hall, Miami Beach, FloridaPhotograph: Lynne Sladky/AP
Dan Gelber, the mayor of Miami Beach, received a warmer reception than any politician might have expected when he emerged to address the hundreds of student climate campaigners making a racket right outside his office window. 
Perhaps it's the $500m dollars his city is investing over the next five years to combat the effects of sea level rise, which already leaves neighborhoods under water during higher than usual tides. Scientists predict up to a three feet sea level rise by 2050.
Understated sign of the day award at Miami Beach #ClimateStrike won hands down by this dude            @GuardianUS           #schoolstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/qj36M4o6Ry
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
Gelber pointed out the strides already taken to improve things on this island city barely seven by one miles in size: an aggressive program of elevating roads and laying larger capacity drainage pipes, along with investing in modern pump equipment and technology to faster shift the rising flood waters. It's little wonder the environmentally-conscious city's slogan is            Rising Above.
And today the Miami Herald reported on what could become the city's most ambitious project yet, a proposal to turn the city-owned golf course into a 115-acre wetland park, which the newspaper says is certain to test the boundaries of what the public will accept in the name of resilience.
"Change is never easy," Miami Beach commissioner Ricky Arriola said. "If we're truly serious about dealing with climate change then everything is on the table, including the golf course. If we're not willing to even talk about it then we're just paying lip service."
Gabriella Marchesani, 17, organizer of the Miami Beach youth climate strike, praises the city's efforts but says more needs to be done to address the causes of the climate crisis as well as dealing with its effects.
"Miami Beach has spent a lot of money on adaptation, it can be the leading city and we hope other cities in Florida will follow," she said. "But this cannot be done slowly, and we need climate policy. Does it matter if we're under 15 feet of water or 50 feet?"
Nurse Angel Allen and her family drove more than 100 miles from Port St Lucie to join the Miami Beach #ClimateStrike Malik, 15, says he just wants there to be a world to visit in the future            #schoolstrike4climate           @GuardianUS           pic.twitter.com/UTKZlAqEKN
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
Updated at 8.55pm BST
8.49pm BST
Thousands converge on Battery Park, New York
Most New York strikers have now made it down to Battery Park where a stage has been set up close to the water. Hundreds of people are packed around the stage, Greta is slated to speak, and many more are camped out sitting on the grass in the park. 
Battery Park is packed with people #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/Sr8tRI76Tu
 - Lauren Aratani (@LaurenAratani) September 20, 2019
Young speakers took the stage giving personal testimonies of how the climate crisis is affecting them, denouncing politicians on both sides, saying just believing the facts isn't enough without action. 
When Jaden Smith took the stage, people started running the stage. In between two songs he reminded the crowd: "We gotta show people we care about this."
Student activists gather in Battery Park in lower Manhattan in New YorkPhotograph: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters
Updated at 9.00pm BST
8.45pm BST
Climate meme power
People keep stopping Lauren Drabenstott, an NYU student, for pictures of her double-sided poster. "I just felt like it's a good way to get across the younger generation." #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/w5vhRmvzOa
 - Lauren Aratani (@LaurenAratani) September 20, 2019
8.40pm BST
Dorian victims convinced of link to climate change
Reporting from the hurricane-hit Bahamas last week, I met David Dean, a sous chef at one of its holiday resorts. "My wife and kids had me as 'dead' on Facebook because they couldn't find me," he said. "When I called them, there was a lot of crying."
Like many in these Caribbean islands, Dean is convinced that the climate crisis in making hurricanes such as Dorian more likely and more intense. "It was very hot," the 38-year-old said. "That's why the hurricane was coming to us. Heat brings the hurricane and makes it worse."
Haitian Burris Filburt, right, and another man stand on the extensive damage and destruction in the aftermath of Hurricane Dorian is seen in The Mudd, Great Abaco, Bahamas, September 5, 2019.Photograph: Gonzalo Gaudenzi/AP
Some 52 people are confirmed dead in the Bahamas, a figure expected to rise, and more than 1,300 are still missing. The scale of destruction was astonishing, as if a giant with a child's temperament had run amok, flipping over cars and buses like toys. As so often, the underclass suffers the most.
The science is complex but this Guardian article explains how global heating made Dorian bigger, wetter and deadlier.
Many in the Bahamas are determined to stay the course, not least because tourism is so crucial to the economy. The owners of the hard hit Treasure Cay beach, marine and golf resort declared their intention to rebuild. But some residents also expressed concern that such efforts could be undone by the next hurricane, and the one after that.
For now the Bahamas is dealing with scars, mental and physical. Dean told me: "Now, if I feel a little rain, it might be drive me crazy. I'm traumatised. I don't ever want to go through that again."
Related: 'The poor are punished': Dorian lays bare inequality in the Bahamas
8.32pm BST
This video is great at capturing some of the scale of the New York action.
NYCs massive #ClimateStrike march has begun, from Foley Sq down Centre St to Chambers St across to Broadway... and down to the Battery! Thank you            @ClimateCrisis and everyone else marching!            pic.twitter.com/WUpeRP0ZQS
 - Gale A. Brewer (@galeabrewer) September 20, 2019
8.31pm BST
Which countries contribute most to the climate crisis? How much is the US to blame? 
China produces the most heat-trapping pollution, followed by the US, the European Union, India and Russia. But historically, the US has contributed more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere than any other nation. 
The US also has high emissions per capita, compared to other developed countries. And Americans buy products made in China, therefore supporting China's carbon footprint. 
In 2017 China produced 13 times more C02 than it did in 1960Emissions of CO2 from major countries 
What has happened to the US Environmental Protection Agency with climate change?
The EPA has begun efforts to eliminate climate rules for power plants, cars and the methane leaked from oil and gas facilities. 
Has the US already pulled out of the Paris accord? What if Democrats win next election? 
The US has not yet exited the international accord, in which every other nation on earth agreed to voluntarily begin to curb emissions. The deal was meant to prevent global average temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above preindustrial levels. 
Technically, the US cannot leave the agreement until the day after the November 2020 election, when Trump will still be president regardless of the outcome. 
A Democrat president could rejoin the deal. 
Updated at 8.35pm BST
7.58pm BST
Is Donald Trump making climate change worse with his rollbacks?
The US is falling far short of its commitments to curb heat-trapping pollution, in part because Trump has gutted efforts made by his predecessor, Barack Obama. 
The country is on track to cut emissions 13% to 16% below 2005 levels by 2020, according to the analysis firm Rhodium Group. That's short of the 17% reduction the US promised in the Copenhagen Accord. "Looking ahead to 2025, the US is on track to achieve reductions anywhere from 12% to 19% below 2005 levels absent major policy changes-a far cry from its Paris Agreement pledge to reduce emissions 26% to 28%," Rhodium Group explains. 
The US, however, represents 15% of world emissions. 
Is Donald Trump a climate change denier? What is his record?
Before becoming president, Trump called climate change a Chinese hoax. In an interview with Piers Morgan, he deflected questions about how his policies promote continued climate-change causing emissions. He said the US has "the cleanest climates" and "China, India, Russia, many other nations, they have not very good air, not very good water." 
Trump's White House has downplayed the dangers of the climate crisis, including disagreeing with a federal report showing it threatens the US economy. Many of the president's appointees have denied climate change, and government scientists say their work on the crisis has been silenced. 
7.50pm BST
It is, of course, worth keeping in mind today the specific demands that climate groups have for meaningful action. The Youth Climate Strike Coalition in the US, has issued a            set of policy demands which includes:
    • Transform our economy to 100% clean, renewable energy by 2030 and phase out all fossil fuel extraction through a just and equitable transition, creating millions of good jobs
    • A halt to all leasing and permitting for fossil fuel extraction, processing and infrastructure projects immediately
    • Respect of Indigenous Land and Sovereignty and Environmental Justice
    • Protection and restoration of 50% of the world's lands and oceans including a halt to all deforestation by 2030
    • Investment in farmers and regenerative agriculture and an end to subsidies for industrial agriculture
7.34pm BST
Downtown New York City is packed with sign-bearing people of all ages, though the crowd noticeably skews young. Students from all over NYC have come to the march. Many young children are accompanied by their parents while middle and high school students are here with their friends. Almost all groups have posters in hand. 
On the way down to the march, I caught up with students from Professional Performing Arts School, who caught the subway to attend the strike together. They met up at school and decided to go to the march in a group. 
"I just want the world to exist the way I knew it was growing up," said Nyla Robothan, a 15-year-old student at the school, on why she's striking. 
Caught up with students from Professional Performing Arts School in New York who were taking the subway en route to the march. "I just want the world to exist the way I knew when I was growing up," Nyla, a student, told me. #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/dztcOndhlH
 - Lauren Aratani (@LaurenAratani) September 20, 2019
Many say this isn't their first march, having participating in other climate marches or the March For Our Lives protest in 2018. They say that they feel like their future feels uncertain because of the climate crisis, yet no one is listening to their generation. 
"Our planet is dying, and no one's going to be doing anything except for us right now," said Arlene Guevara, 17, a student at Beacon High School in Manhattan. 
Arlene Guevara and Melanie Garcia, two students from Beacon High School. "Our planet is dying, and no one's going to be doing anything except for us right now," Arlene told me. pic.twitter.com/NGjHSbhcNd
 - Lauren Aratani (@LaurenAratani) September 20, 2019
The march is slowly making its way down to Battery Park at the southern tip of Manhattan, where speakers, including Greta Thunberg, are slated to speak in the afternoon. 
7.28pm BST
Amazon's Seattle headquarters in Seattle, Washington, US, January 29, 2018.Photograph: Lindsey Wasson/Reuters
We are expecting hundreds of Amazon workers to strike later in their HQ city of Seattle, Washington. 
Levi Pulkkinen is there to report on this for us and ahead of the strikes there, sent us this explainer of how some of the giant firm's workers are taking action and Thursday's move by Jeff Bezos pledging to improve Amazon's environmental impact: 
After months agitating for climate accountability from their employer, Amazon.com workers celebrated Thursday as the Seattle-based retail and cloud computing giant pledged to zero out carbon emissions by 2040. 
The announcement from CEO Jeff Bezos came as about 1,500 Amazon workers prepared to walkout Friday as part of the global strike for climate change. The disruption would mark the first time white-collar Amazon workers have walked off the job.
Asserting that Bezos' pledge " proves that collective action and employee pressure works," organizers of the stoppage reiterated demands that Amazon Web Services stop doing business with fossil fuel companies, and that the company cut ties with lobbyists, politicians and researchers hostile to climate science.
Those calls were left unaddressed by the company, which did announce plans to acquire 100,000 electric delivery vans manufactured by an Amazon-funded company and an $100m commitment to an environmental restoration fund managed by The Nature Conservancy. In a statement, Bezos described the initiatives as evidencing a shift within Amazon. 
"We're done being in the middle of the herd on this issue - we've decided to use our size and scale to make a difference," Bezos said. "If a company with as much physical infrastructure as Amazon - which delivers more than 10 billion items a year - can meet the Paris Agreement 10 years early, then any company can."
Amazon, making good on a promise offered earlier in the year, also for the first time released an accounting of its carbon footprint. The assessment, audited by Paris-based certification agency Bureau Veritas, showed Amazon's direct and indirect CO2 emissions amounted to 44.4 million metric tons in 2018, a year that saw 37.1 billion metric tons of the greenhouse gas released globally.
In Seattle, students will march from Cal Anderson Park in Capitol Hill to City Hall starting at noon. From 1 p.m. to 3 p.m., the marchers will hold a youth-led rally for climate justice at City Hall. https://t.co/mKzqhlINSR
 - KOMO News (@komonews) September 20, 2019
7.10pm BST
The Guardian's Latin American correspondent Tom Phillips has spotted a striking banner in Guadalajara, Mexico. 
"What's the point in studying for a non-existent future?" #ClimateStrike protesters in Guadalajara, Mexico today pic via            @LibiaServin           pic.twitter.com/XVpvfw6AVb
 - Tom Phillips (@tomphillipsin) September 20, 2019
7.04pm BST
Here's some footage from climate strikes around the world today:
7.02pm BST
Miami student Greta Rodriguez feels exactly the same way as the famous teenage climate activist who shares her first name, and had a similar message as she joined dozens of classmates to protest in Miami Beach: We've just had enough.
The 15-year-old was among a party of 50 students from the Cushman private school in Key Biscayne who wanted to make their voices heard in this low-lying coastal city that is recognized as ground zero for sea level rise.
"We've had enough of big business and their trash, burning fossil fuels, depleting the earth," she said. "It has to change."
Chaperoned by biology teacher Jen Russell, the Cushman kids were among the loudest at the Miami Beach strike. "They wanted to be here and the student government association organized the whole thing," Russell said.
"It was important to them. We can talk to them as adults but it's the children who have the voice, it's their future."
Delighted to meet these smart young ladies from @CushmanSchool at Miami Beach            #schoolstrike4climate today. About 50 Cushman students attended, says biology teacher Jen Russell            #ClimateStrike           @GuardianUS           pic.twitter.com/w7dgKolraO
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
The Miami Beach strike drew hundreds of students from schools, colleges and universities across South Florida. A similar, simultaneous event outside the Broward school district headquarters in Fort Lauderdale attracted another large crowd.
While private schools such as Cushman turned up with numbers, local public school leaders proved less amenable to students walking out of classes, however. Elijah Ruby, 17, a senior at South Broward high school, was banned from his prom for handing out flyers for the Fort Lauderdale event, according to the Miami Herald, and both the Broward and Miami-Dade school districts announced that absences for the strike would be recorded as unexcused.
6.59pm BST
At the New York event are Zariah, age seven, and Lori Sapphire, who says: "We're here to save the planet. So no packaging. It's an easy solution. Focus on solar energy. No more cars burning oil. Stop taking every mineral from the earth. Go back to the simple ways.
"There's enough for everyone. Stop burning the forests because we want to eat meat and soybeans. Use hemp for everything. It almost a joke that everything were doing is being so selfishly and unconsciously. It like we're not from the planet, otherwise we'd care." 
Zariah, age 7, and Lori SapphirePhotograph: Ed Helmore/Guardian US
6.48pm BST
The crowds in New York are massive but everyone is slowly making their way down to Battery Park. 
Sixteen year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg takes part in a demonstration as part of the Global Climate Strike in lower Manhattan in New York.Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/ReutersCrowds of children skipped school to join a global strike against climate change, heeding the rallying cry of teen activist Greta Thunberg and demanding adults act to stop environmental disaster. It was expected to be the biggest protest ever against the threat posed to the planet by climate change.Photograph: Johannes Eisele/AFP/Getty Images
Updated at 7.07pm BST
6.46pm BST
Earlier at the breakfast meeting for indigenous people from the Amazon and Indonesia, 19 year old Artemisa Barbosa Ribeiro, a climate activist known as Artemisa Xakriabá, told the Guardian she is thankful for all the young people who are joining the movement.
" I can see a future where we can make a difference but for that we must be listened to and respected," she said, describing how her people, the Xakriabá peoples, a group of approximately 12 thousand people who live on the left bank of the São Francisco River, in the municipality of São João das Missões, in the state of Minas Gerais, have watched as mining companies have denied them access to the river and its water. 
"The scarcity of water in the territory is noticeable" she says. " We need the river and the water for our living and for our spiritual health, our connection to the earth. So access to the river is a big issue for us."
Ribeiro, who was recently in Washington DC to demand action from members of the US congress alongside Greta Thunberg, said she felt that Jaire Bolsnaro's government have a plan for all indigenous people.
 "I believe they want to assassinate us," she said frankly. "It's got much worse in the last eight months. We need support from outside the country because from the inside we have no support. 
"The main thing you can do in the west to help is to stop importing hard wood because that is causing deforestation and exploitation. That is the best way you can help," Ribeiro added. 
Brazilian Amazonian Indigenous leader Artemisa XakriabaPhotograph: Eric Baradat/AFP/Getty Images
6.39pm BST
Here is a message from Greta Thunberg, who will be making a speech at the New York event later in Battery Park:
6.29pm BST
There are many, many hundreds of protesters in DC. Blocks and blocks of a roughly 6-lane street filled and more coming and marching toward the US Capitol. I can't see the end.
#climatestrikedc           #globalclimatestrike           #fridaysforfuture           pic.twitter.com/cyuHjnnurX
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
#ClimateStrikedc           #globalclimatestrike           pic.twitter.com/1hfciTiNSN
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
"This is the fight for our future" #dcclimatestrike           #GlobalClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/WwqsaJty9Q
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
#globalclimatestrike hundreds behind them not pictured            #dcclimatestrike           pic.twitter.com/7s4bisRNGa
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
"I speak for the trees. They said f**k you." #climatestrike           #GlobalClimateStrike           #dcclimatestrike           pic.twitter.com/90uefWI3Vv
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
"Whose plant? Our planet" #ClimateStrike           #GlobalClimateStrike           #dcclimatestrike           pic.twitter.com/9HXofNgSWO
 - Emily Holden (@emilyhholden) September 20, 2019
6.21pm BST
This gives you a sense of how big the gathering in New York is - so many people want to participate. 
#ClimateStrike protest is so big in Lower Manhattan that the            #NYPD had to shut down all of the streets in a section of Lower Manhattan, including the exit from the Brooklyn Bridge.            @PIX11News           @NYPDnews           pic.twitter.com/SSMgxSEhsU
 - James Ford (@jamesfordtv) September 20, 2019
6.18pm BST
Delaney Reynolds has addressed the general assembly of the United Nations on the climate crisis. She has appeared in a prime time National Geographic special, written books, won awards, launched a non-profit battling sea rise, shared a stage with Al Gore and changed laws in almost a decade as an environmental activist and entrepreneur. 
She is also still only 20. 
"The youth voice is extremely powerful," says Reynolds, a speaker at this morning's youth climate strike in Miami Beach.
"I hope our elected leaders realise that current young voters and soon-to-be voters care passionately about this issue and very much want to see something done about it."
Reynolds is not afraid to play hardball to tackle the climate emergency. She is the lead plaintiff of eight young Floridians currently suing their state and its governor for "violating their fundamental rights to a stable climate system" through their reliance on fossil fuels. 
But she knows collaboration can work just as well as confrontation. As a teenager she was instrumental in getting the city of South Miami to adopt Florida's first law requiring solar panels on newly-built homes.
"We also spoke at a Miami-Dade budget hearing and the same day after hearing the children speak the county created the post of chief resilience officer," she said.
"The young generation is starting to realise our voice matters. Our leaders are going to have to pay attention if a bunch of kids stop going to school and start standing on their steps at city hall. They may not have a vote but they do have a voice."
Climate protestors in Miami Beach not mincing their words. Another sign I just saw says simply: "It's fucking hot." #ClimateStrike           @guardianus           #schoolstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/MTr6MR5tG5
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
If scientists are right, Miami Beach City Hall will be under 7ft of water by 2100. The youth of Miami has something to say about it #ClimateStrike           @guardianus           #schoolstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/KbT1sKpGbN
 - Richard Luscombe (@richlusc) September 20, 2019
6.11pm BST
The climate strike is being held the same day as the two-year anniversary of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico and left nearly 3,000 people dead.
In recognition of that event, the climate strike is happening in concert with a Puerto Rico Day of Action to highlight the struggles the island still faces in its effort to rebuild, while remaining vulnerable to the impact of climate change. 
Marisol Rivera, a 13-year-old Puerto Rican student in Brooklyn, has been speaking on Friday about Maria and how it impacted her family, She will connect the issues there to the climate crisis. 
Other Puerto Rican activists will also speak at the event, including Gustavo Rivera, a New York state senator (he is unrelated to Marisol). 
Puerto Rico is still recovering from the hurricane, which affected all of the 3.5 million Americans who lived on the island. Its power grid was            knocked out completely by the storm and families reported having no electricity            nearly a year after the hurricane.
6.04pm BST
Here are some photographs of people gathering in New York's Foley Square. 
'I missed bio for this'Photograph: Timothy A Clary/AFP/Getty ImagesFoley Square, New YorkPhotograph: Timothy A Clary/AFP/Getty ImagesCrowds of children skipped school in New York to join the protests - with parental permissionPhotograph: Timothy A Clary/AFP/Getty Images
5.56pm BST
Exclusive: Trump to attend religious freedom meeting at UN during climate summitUS President Donald Trump at a press conference at the White House on FridayPhotograph: Alex Edelman/AFP/Getty Images
Donald Trump is set to attend the United Nations headquarters during Monday's key summit on the climate crisis - but will be there to take part in a meeting on religious freedom instead.
A senior UN official confirmed to the Guardian that the White House has booked one of the large conference rooms in the New York headquarters on Monday so that the president can address a gathering on religious freedom.
The move is likely to be seen as a blatant snub to the UN climate summit, to be held in the same building on the same day. Leaders from around the world, including the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson; France's president, Emmanuel Macron; and India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, are expected at the summit as part of a major UN push to heighten the response to the escalating climate crisis.
UN sources said the booking of the room was relatively last minute and will cause some logistical issues given the major security operation that accompanies the US president wherever he goes. But a senior UN official said they were "not panicked" given the large organizational capacity of the UN general assembly.
"No one was really expecting the president to come to the climate summit," the official said. It's understood that senior UN staff have realistic expectations of Trump and do not expect him to engage on the climate crisis, even for a summit held in his hometown. Trump has vowed the US will withdraw from the landmark Paris climate agreement.
Related: Trump to attend religious freedom meeting at UN during climate summit
5.50pm BST
Many folks have come to New York from all over the world to attend today's strike, planning their trips months in advance.
Our Village, a coalition made of indigenous groups and communities of color, spoke to reporters this morning, in a studio space in New York City where they were making signs and distributing T-shirts in anticipation of the march. 
Dinaman Tuxá, traveled from Bahia, Brazil with a delegation of six Brazillians from all over the country to speak out against the injustices against indigenous communities in Brazil.
"We're going through a process of genoicde. ... President Bolsonaro, he's decimating hate against the indigenous populations of Brazil," Tuxá said through a translator. "Us, the indigenous people, we are the guardians of the forest. ... We need the world to recognize our contributions and help us protect our territories." 
Tuxá said that he traveled to New York because Brazillians aren't listening to the cry of indigenous communities in their country, so they're making an international cry in anticipation of the UN climate summit. 
I'm helping @guardian with its live coverage of today's climate strike in NYC. I started my day off with Our Village, a coalition of indigenous groups and communities of color, who are prepping for the march. People came from as far as Brazil and Indonesia for the strikes.            pic.twitter.com/12hiaL2fF3
 - Lauren Aratani (@LaurenAratani) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.53pm BST
5.48pm BST
The United Nations headquarters in New York will play host tonight to an immersive art installation by artist Joseph Michael that features images of an iceberg and six young advocates, including Greta Thunberg, addressing hopes and fears around the climate crisis. We have some pictures from last night's final rehearsal :
Related: Voices for the Future: climate activism lights up the UN - in pictures
5.45pm BST
We will be live through the rest of the day here in the US with Oliver Milman, Lauren Aratani  and Ed Helmore reporting on the big rally in New York city.
Emily Holden, meanwhile, is out with activists in Washington DC while Richard Luscombe is at the strikes in Miami Beach. 
Later on, Levi Pulkkinen in Seattle will be with more than 1,500 corporate Amazon workers expected to strike to highlight criticisms of the company's climate policies. CEO Jeff Bozos said on Thursday that Amazon would do more and pledged the firm would be carbon neutral by 2040. 
Susie Cagle, meanwhile, will be reporting on the strikes from the city of Richmond, California, and we'll also have a dispatch from  Dom Phillips  in Rio de Janeiro. 
All week, the Guardian has been part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of more than 250 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate emergency. 
Updated at 5.49pm BST
5.38pm BST
Welcome from the Guardian's office in New York, where we are now anchoring live coverage of these calls for climate action, which have drawn huge crowds around the world. 
We expect the US will be staging its largest ever climate strike, with actions planned in more than 1,000 locations, including major rallies in New York, Washington DC, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco and Miami. 
Here at the Guardian's New York office, members of our team in midtown Manhattan walked out at midday local time to participate in the strike. 
Further downtown, Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg will be leading a big strike rally which she is expected to speak at later in the day, ahead of addressing the UN's Climate Action Summit next week. 
Activists are gathering in Foley Square, near City Hall, and will start marching south on Broadway at 1pm ET to rally in Battery park. 
People gather during the global climate strike march at Foley Square in New York.Photograph: Timothy A Clary/AFP/Getty Images
Updated at 5.41pm BST
5.33pm BST
There have already been significant protests across the world today with millions joining the climate strike to urge politicians and businesses to take action to avert the climate crisis.
With parts of the US just waking up and others still asleep it's far from over so I'm handing over to my colleague Mark Oliver, who is taking over the blog and will keep you abreast of all the latest developments in the US and elsewhere. 
People gather and march during the global climate strike march in Washington, DC.Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images
Updated at 5.38pm BST
5.25pm BST
Back in the UK, the police monitoring group Netpol says that officers are restricting protesters in London by kettling them (for those unfamiliar with the British vernacular it means confining demonstrators in a small area) on the southside of Westminster Bridge.
Police have kettled part of the #ClimateStrike demo. They are saying people cannot protest but also one office just shouted at someone "if you leave you will be arrested." Out of control, nonsensical and completely disproportionate.            pic.twitter.com/pxJsDbx5FO
 - Netpol (@netpol) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.26pm BST
5.18pm BST
New York is standing up!
The scene in NYC #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/ihnwmyfIPz
 - Jonathan Mann (@songadaymann) September 20, 2019
5.14pm BST
The Rolling Stones legend Keith Richards has endorsed the climate strike, realising that Time is not actually On Our Side (sorry). 
I stand in support of the global #climatestrike today. We need to do everything we can to protect our planet and humanity. Find out more at            https://t.co/YZFM0eBd0n           pic.twitter.com/SD52R7uywL
 - Keith Richards (@officialKeef) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.17pm BST
5.08pm BST
The Guardian has partnered with Friends of the Earth to highlight the climate crisis and raise funds for the charity, which is doing so much to address the damage that has been done and continues to be done to the planet.
Related: The Art of Activism: buy a sustainable print and tote bag to support Friends of the Earth
4.58pm BST
Here is a country I'm not sure we've featured on the blog so far today.
The #ClimateStrike in Pakistan.            pic.twitter.com/yZ9VoZnWsP
 - Waleed Shahid (@_waleedshahid) September 20, 2019
4.55pm BST
With the US protests beginning, it feels like a good time to highlight this article on the huge impact climate change could have on the nation if it is not arrested. 
Related: Death, blackouts, melting asphalt: ways the climate crisis will change how we live
4.48pm BST
The US is waking up (in more ways than one) and already there are sizeable crowds reported. 
Huge crowd on #ClimateStrike in DC chanting "This is what democracy looks like!"            #strikewithus           #greennewdeal           #fridaysforfuture           pic.twitter.com/BhlqNiWrQ
 - Food & Water Watch (@foodandwater) September 20, 2019
There is a large crowd at the Old Capitol for the #ClimateStrike in            #Tallahassee.            pic.twitter.com/CBC9hlsder
 - Charles Roop (@CharlesRoopWCTV) September 20, 2019
#ClimateStrike at University of New Hampshire. Proud to see my students (undergrad and grad) here. Wildcats fight for the future!            pic.twitter.com/aUb7syZsX4
 - Dr. Chanda Prescod-Weinstein ??????? ?????????? (@IBJIYONGI) September 20, 2019
We're here at Brooklyn Borough Hall rallying with local students for the #ClimateStrike, and we're fired up!            pic.twitter.com/hA5BGqATg8
 - Eric Adams (@BPEricAdams) September 20, 2019
4.42pm BST
Here is a useful reminder about the impact of flying. You can also calculate the impact of your next trip. 
Related: How your flight emits as much CO2 as many people do in a year
4.36pm BST
Anuna De Wever, 18, a cofounder of Belgium's school strike movement, which has organised 20 nationwide strike days since January, said today's protest in Brussels made her feel hopeful.
It was amazing, we had 20,000 across the streets. I am really happy about this strike because I feel like after coming on the streets after 20 weeks, this is our season two. There are so many people ready and it just makes me feel very hopeful.
But she added: 
Belgium is doing really badly on the climate crisis. There is not any ambition from any of our politicians. So we are really asking them to take responsibility because right now we don't have a climate policy and they really need to take responsibility.
While Belgium has signed the Paris Agreement, the three Belgian regions (Flanders, Brussels and Wallonia) have so far been unable to agree on the distribution of emissions cuts. 
De Wever thinks the school strike movement is helping to bridge these old political divides. 
There are some arguments, especially in politics but we don't care about that and we want to unite everyone to fight with us. I think it's beautiful that no one is thinking about this, are they from the Walloon side or are they from the Flemish side.
The Brussels protest finished close to the headquarters of the European commission and European council - not an accidental choice as the EU debates decarbonising its economy by 2050. 
Earlier in the day, De Wever and other activists met the European commission vice president, Frans Timmermans, who has been tasked with drawing up a Green New Deal to allow the EU to move away from fossil fuel and meet its climate pledges. 
EU civil servants on climate strike in BrusselsPhotograph: Jennifer Rankin/The Guardian
4.36pm BST
The bulk of those still taking part in the climate strike in London reached the entrance to Trafalgar Square a little earlier, where police blocked it off at Northumberland Avenue, to chants of "let them through". Many people are on their way home now.
I was speaking at the back of the crowd to two new mothers, Chloe Reeves and Lauren Slattery, who had brought along their children, Leo (five months) and Phoenix (seven months). 
While deeply concerned about the climate crisis - to the extent that they have discussed jointly purchasing land on higher ground for children as a reaction to rising sea levels - they've been drawing some encouragement from the international focus of the strikes.
"To be honest as a new mother I've been putting all my energy into the basic job of keeping baby alive and looking after him and I've purposefully not thought about climate change because it has freaked me out so much, but now my mother instincts have allowed me to shift a bit of emphasis on to things like this and the action that we need to take," said Chloe.
Lauren added: "Actions like today have really been inspiring. We recycle and do as much as we can in our personal daily lives but you really realise that so much more needs to done, and we really are on a tight schedule." 
Meanwhile, two of the youngest participants in the London #ClimateStrike - Phoenix (7mnths) & Leo (5mnths) (They've brought along their mums Lauren and Cloe)            pic.twitter.com/fGY3fd4vra
 - Ben Quinn (@BenQuinn75) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.56pm BST
4.21pm BST
Nearly two-thirds (64%) of Generation Z Americans want to work for employers committed to tackling climate change, according to research released today from international non-profit organisation the Climate Group.
It surveyed more than 1,000 16- to 24-year-olds across the US to find out their views on climate change and how it will affect their future choices. Three in four young people (77%) feel climate change is an important issue that needs to be solved, with almost identical results for Democratic and Republican states (80% v 76%).
 With the US federal government actively rolling back pro-climate policies, for most young people the bulk of responsibility to solve the climate crisis rests on the shoulders of big US businesses and state governments alike (60% for big businesses v 69% for state governments).
Four out of five (80%) support US companies adopting renewable energy in place of fossil fuels, with two in five (40%) believing they should be using 100% clean energy already. Two-fifths think the switch needs to be made by 2030 at the latest. 
Within the transport sector, two-thirds (66%) of young people would support the replacement of short-haul flights with cleaner alternatives, such as high-speed rail.
Helen Clarkson, CEO of the Climate Group, which annually hosts Climate Week NYC, said: 
We need wholescale changes to economies and infrastructure to make pro-climate choices the new normal. It is in the interests of every business and government to sit up and listen to the next generation of workers and voters. 
 We know through our initiatives for business on renewables, electric vehicles, and smart efficient energy and work with state and regional governments that good progress is being made in the US, but more needs to be done at a greater pace and scale.
Updated at 4.26pm BST
4.05pm BST
Demonstrations, marches, even open-air classes on environmental policy are planned in more than 40 Brazilian cities on Friday. And while numbers are likely to range widely - from 186 people who signed up for the Facebook event of a            protest at 5pm in the southern city of Florianópolis to 12,000 promising to attend            another at 4pm on São Paulo's landmark Paulista Avenue, activists said the geographical spread of cities taking part shows how non-party, environmental activism is growing here. 
"We are talking to churches, unions, social movements," said Yumi Kawamura, 45, a sociologist helping organise the São Paulo event, "looking to unite organisations with different agendas and find a common way forward."
In Rio de Janeiro, a protest at 10am outside the state legislature is aimed at children and young people. Another is scheduled for 2.30pm. Then at 4pm demonstrators hold an open-air class outside the headquarters of beleaguered environment agency Ibama - under attack from far-right president Jair Bolsonaro and his business-friendly environment minister,            Ricardo Salles - before marching to the city centre.
Events are being staged by the Rio Climate Coalition ( Coalizão Pelo Clima Rio ), an umbrella group of collectives. "It is very plural, it is horizontal, it is collective. It is aligned with the movement that Greta (Thunberg) started in Europe," said Hanna Cordeiro, 31, an advertising executive and climate activist from the coalition.
Brazil is one of the world's deadliest countries for environmental defenders - one reason, Cordeiro said, why environmental demonstrations in Brazil are usually smaller here. Another is that pressing problems with poverty, crime, unemployment and a lack of basic sanitation obscure environmental issues for many Brazilians.
"In Brazil it is jobs and housing. The environmental agenda is seen as more subjective. In Europe it is much stronger," said José Oeiras, 57, a climate organiser for the leftist Workers' party helping stage a demonstration at 4pm in the Amazon city of Belém.
When the Amazon fires crisis exploded, Bolsonaro's supporters flooded social media and WhatsApp with fake news - a report by the Publica journalism agency showed how automated Twitter accounts led attacks. The propaganda deluge echoed Bolsonaro's unproven arguments that the blazes were started by foreign NGOs and foreign interest constituted an attack on Brazilian sovereignty.
Such nationalist rhetoric has long resounded in the Amazon. "This is an old argument," Oeiras said. "It's a contradiction we need to overcome."
Updated at 4.13pm BST
3.55pm BST
Fatima Zara Alarakha, 20, a campaigner for Islamic Relief UK and an arts student, marching on Millbank beside the Houses of Parliament in central London, said fighting climate change was imperative, given her beliefs: 
I'm here today because it is my duty as Muslim and a human. Allah entrusted us to look after the earth and it is our responsibility to do so.
I'm striking today to represent my family in Pakistan whose houses are being flooded as a result of our overconsumption in the west. I'm also here to represent the future generations whose lives will be affected by the decisions we make. I want to bring children up in a world where they don't have to suffer from majorly polluted air, decrepit housing and the health problems and poverty brought on by the climate crisis.
Fatima Zara Alarakha marches in the climate strike in London.Photograph: Islamic Relief UK
Updated at 4.14pm BST
3.37pm BST
Manisha Jeevan, 16, isn't sure she is ready for her music exam tomorrow. But she decided to skip school because climate change is more important, she says. "If there is no earth then how will we live?"
She is protesting near Lodhi gardens, Delhi, with her friend, Kushi, also 16. They worry about pollution in Delhi, about the failure to manage waste properly and about the increasingly hot weather. "It's September. Our parents used to get winter in this month but we have not got winter. We are losing our seasons," says Kushi. 
"It's September. Our parents used to get winter in this month but we have not got winter. We are losing our seasons," says Kushi, 16, who is protesting with her friend Manisha in Delhi #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/UywZlK5btW
 - Rebecca Ratcliffe (@rebeccarat) September 20, 2019
Rishika Singh, 18, a college student, worries about the damage that Delhi's pollution is doing to her lungs. She says: 
I even bought a mask, but it's not so easy to wear every day. The pollution that we see here, and the water here which has a lot of chlorine in it - it's not good. It's the poorest who suffer the most.The rich are better off - they make the use of air conditioning and private cars for comfort.
It's evening now in Delhi and, after an afternoon of chanting and banging drums, protesters have gone home. Nimrat Singh, 21, a law student, says people want action, not words, from their leaders. "We want the system to actually recognise climate change," she says. 
Updated at 3.41pm BST
3.30pm BST
New York City is anticipated to see one of the largest climate strikes today. Thousands of people are expected at the protest, which is being co-hosted by over two dozen local and national groups. Protesters plan to gather at a park outside New York's City Hall and march a mile down to Battery Park, where Greta Thunberg is scheduled to speak in the afternoon along with other performers and speakers.
In anticipation of the strikes, NYC's Department of Education announced the absences of students in the district, the largest school district in the nation, will be excused on Friday with parental permission. In other words, 1.1 million students have been given the green light to attend the strikes if they want to. Many students have spent the last few weeks            painting signs and banners in preparation. 
Before the march's official start at noon local time (5pm BST), a rally honoring the two-year anniversary of Hurricane Maria will take place in downtown Manhattan. 
Updated at 3.37pm BST
3.23pm BST
The central London rally, outside parliament, has heard speeches from Jeremy Corbyn and Caroline Lucas, with the Labour leader calling for tougher global environmental standards to prevent the import of products made overseas using harmful processes.
From an open-top double-decker bus being used a stage, Corbyn told the crowd:
So when we measure the effects of climate change emissions, let's measure those emissions at the source, where they are created, and not put ourselves in some comfort zone, that we're doing OK at the expense of somebody else.
Corbyn also called for what Labour term a "green industrial revolution" - a version of the green new deal - to invest heavily in areas such as sustainable energy.
That green industrial revolution can bring about, I believe, 400,000 decent, high-quality jobs. And with that we also have cleaner air, we have better quality of life, and we deal with many of the health inequalities that exist in this country.
Labour Leader Jeremy Corbyn addresses the crowd during the global climate strike in LondonPhotograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images
Beforehand, Lucas began by noting that in May parliament had passed a motion declaring a climate emergency. "So don't ever let anyone tell you that you are not making a difference," the Green MP told the crowd. "You are making history." 
Calling it "the biggest social justice issue of our time", Lucas said the government needed to make more urgent plans than the commitment of net zero carbon emissions by 2050.
She said: 
The truth is that a climate target of net zero by 2050 is not climate leadership. When your house is on fire you don't call 999 and ask for a fire engine in 30 years' time. You want urgent action now.
Green Party MP Caroline Lucas speaks during today's climate change demonstration in LondonPhotograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters
Updated at 6.28pm BST
3.19pm BST
This is a striking picture, no pun intended, from Berlin. 
The translation of the sign held by "Merkel" reads: "Mother (Merkel) has failed, now it's the turn of young people." 
Climate strikers dressed up as Angela Merkel and Donald TrumpPhotograph: Kate Connolly/The Guardian
3.10pm BST
The Bishop of Wolverhampton, Clive Gregory, has asked all clergy members and lay employees within the Dioceses of Lichfield to set aside their usual duties today to focus instead on Climate Action activities. 
Gregory led a special service at Lichfield Cathedral to raise awareness about the climate crisis. Around 550 pupils and teachers from five West Midlands primary schools attended. 
Children from St Michael's CE primary school in Lichfield arrived holding handmade signs and chanting "save our world". 
Children from St Michael's C of E primary school in LichfieldPhotograph: Pete Bate/Guardian CommPrimary schoolchildren on their way to Lichfield CathedralPhotograph: Tom Bate/Guardian Community
Updated at 3.11pm BST
3.06pm BST
My colleague, Ben Quinn, is in Westminster where climate strikers are heading towards Downing Street, but there is also a counter-demonstration by Jeremy Corbyn's brother, and famed climate change denier, Piers.
In London #ClimateStrike crowd is moving in direction of N10.. cheers as thin yellow line of police move off in front            pic.twitter.com/rLuKjAnhuu
 - Ben Quinn (@BenQuinn75) September 20, 2019
Piers Corbyn on a megaphone leading a small group of people in Westminster against the #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/FjJvg3KpPi
 - Ben Quinn (@BenQuinn75) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.09pm BST
3.00pm BST
The German government today announced a new climate protection package costing (EURO)50bn, which was immediately criticised as lacking ambition by Fridays for Future protesters. At a press conference in central Berlin, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said that as a scientist she had been impressed by Greta Thunberg's motto "unite behind the science". Following a marathon negotiation session, Merkel's conservatives and her Social Democrat coalition partner detailed plans for increased purchase premiers for electric cars, and new taxes for traditional cars with emissions over 115mg. The measures include a ban on installing oil-fired heating in buildings from 2025, with a subsidy for householders prepared to switch to more climate-friendly alternatives. A price for emissions of carbon dioxide has also been agreed that will take effect via trading in emissions certificates. The package also includes new investment in rail networks, and promises of reduced fares. In a tweet, Fridays for Future criticised the plans: 
Dear government: if you spend years doing nothing for climate protection and then, after months of massive public pressure, discuss measures that have nothing to do with [the plan to halt global warming at] 1.5C, then that's not a 'breakthrough' but a scandal.
Updated at 3.07pm BST
2.55pm BST
You can see some of the best pictures of the day here:
Related: Global climate strike: millions protest worldwide - in pictures
2.53pm BST
Thanks for the excellent questions, which have ranged from science and politics to a plea from a deskbound worker - hang in there! - and thanks to you all for taking part in the debate over climate issues and solutions.
Today's climate strikes have sent a message round the world that will be heard in the highest echelons of politics and business, but which have also helped to spur public engagement with the solutions to the crisis that will be needed if we are to make the vast changes we must to avoid the worst ravages of climate chaos.
On a personal note, today is almost exactly 15 years since I started writing full-time about the climate crisis, and related environmental issues, and although progress in that time has been grindingly slow in many ways, it has also been marked by sudden leaps forward. Improving public understanding and engagement is at the heart of making a better future.
The messages from today are clear. This is not somebody else's problem: it is ours. This is not a problem for the future: it is now. This is not an inevitable catastrophe: we can still make things much better.
Updated at 3.01pm BST
2.52pm BST
A noisy and good natured protest is being held in Bedford, with a few hundred protesters, including one dressed as a giant dinosaur, marching along the High Street at lunchtime shouting "what do we want, climate justice", "no planet B" and "this is what democracy looks like". 
The protest is being led by children from local schools, clearly drawing their inspiration from climate activist Greta Thunberg. Earlier, Bedford's MP, Mohammad Yasin, addressed the crowd, saying he was sorry that politicians had let people down and pledging his support. One young protester addressing the crowd said: "We may only be 14 or 15 years old but we're a force to be reckoned with."
Later, a die-in was held in Harpur Square in Bedford town centre.
Die-in at climate strike in Harpur Square in Bedford town centrePhotograph: The Guardian
Updated at 3.03pm BST
2.45pm BST
Indy Willaert, Liza, Fran Demeyer and Jana Bameils, all aged 13, have taken half a day off school to attend the climate march in Brussels. 
Not all their teachers are in favour. "Some of them are alright with it, but some of them would rather have us in class," says Fran, who has already taken part in several school strikes. "That climate is more important... You can always do [your work] after school," adds Indy.
Liza wants politicians to help make green choices easier, including reducing plastic waste. "We can only buy plastic because everything is in plastic. We want them to help us"
They all agree with Jana that politicians are not doing enough.
The four schoolgirls arrived from their home city of Ghent to join the climate march in Brussels, which started from the city's North Station and will finish around the headquarters of the European Union. 
Fran Demeyer, Jana Bamelis, Liza and Indy WillaertPhotograph: Jennifer Rankin
Along the route there was music, drum beating and chanting. Young people jumped up and down to the slogan: "Plus chaud, plus chaud, plus chaud que le climat" (Hotter, hotter, hotter than the climate). 
Stijn, a 28-year-old engineer, was missing work to join the protest. His employers "were not very happy about it but they couldn't really make a fuss about it either," he said. "Like the other side of my sign says there are no jobs on a dead planet so it is important to be here today." 
His friend, Deniz Malat, 27, a recent plant biology graduate, feels people are being ignored by the government. "We want change and we are being ignored by the government - the politicians. We want to come together to show we are serious and they should consider what we are saying here." 
Updated at 2.53pm BST
2.43pm BST
People are also out in force in Poland.
Warsaw, Poland. #FridaysForFuture           #ClimateStrike           https://t.co/SeuHiUVxmT
 - Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) September 20, 2019
2.42pm BST
Ten-year-old Nellie Jacobs and her mother, Helen, had never protested before their hometown of Whaley Bridge made national headlines earlier this month. 
Nellie and her Dad were choosing books in the library of their quiet Derbyshire town when Helen called them in a panic to say its dam had burst and the whole neighbourhood could go under. 
Carrying a homemade placard saying "School strike for climate", Nellie was allowed to take the day off school at Whaley Bridge primary to join the global strike in Manchester. 
She said: 
Everyone had to be evacuated and we raced for high ground. I was quite scared because we weren't expecting it. We occasionally get police cars coming through Whaley for something that's not in Whaley but we've not had crises in Whaley. 
I'm worried it might happen again. We weren't used to that much rain so it made me worry and it made me think all this rain, we don't get it usually so I thought that it was climate change that caused the rain.
Nellie Jacobs, 10, and her mother, Helen, at the Manchester climate strikePhotograph: Josh Halliday/The Guardian
Her mother Helen Jacobs said she had never protested in her life but felt infuriated by the inaction of global leaders. She said: 
It's kind of getting the politicians to realise that they've made a mistake in saying that it's really nothing when it's a really big problem and we need to act on it now. I thought if I got out here and did something then it might happen.
It's been building up a lot in my mind. The climate is under threat and it has been for a long time but the action doesn't seem to have fit the imperative. We feel like we need to wake the government up, we need to wake world leaders up and make them realise that we need systematic massive change. 
We're here and ready for change to bring the temperature down. We feel like we need to shake them by the collar to make them realise. The scientists are there telling them and still President Trump is denying climate change exists! Other leaders need to grab him, shake him, and get him on board. The whole world needs to get on this.
Updated at 2.55pm BST
2.40pm BST
In Aviemore, a town in the Cairngorms National Park, in the Scottish Highlands, strikes are taking place.
So proud to see my sons heading off for the #ClimateStrike today in            #Aviemore. The placards are made and they are ready to go            #FridayForFuture Time for us all to do more            #Cairngorms           #Climate           #NationalPark           pic.twitter.com/74J9YXzZvN
 - Grant Moir (@cairngormsCEO) September 20, 2019
We were sent another photograph of activity there today from Iain Gibson. 
Updated at 2.41pm BST
2.38pm BST
 Nick from Norwich asked:
How can I join in the strike in a non-unionised office where no one cares about climate change without getting the sack?
That is a tough one. Most companies will be affected by climate chaos in some way, however: extreme weather events are already costing billions a year and those costs are not coming down soon. Foresighted companies will audit the risks they face and act to deal with them. If you work for a publicly listed company, you could try buying some shares and turning up at the AGM to ask questions about how they are dealing with climate risk. If you don't, more of your co-workers may be interested in the climate than you think: polls show a great majority of people in most countries are concerned about the climate crisis.
Dan from Tunbridge Wells asked: 
How will we make our nuclear power plants safe if this civilisation collapses? How does the hydrological cycle fit in? Can regenerative agriculture help?
Regenerative agriculture can help, and sustainable agriculture can reduce emissions, aid carbon storage and feed the world more healthily, as recent reports by the Lancet and WRI, among others, have shown. As for hydrology, the effects of climate chaos are likely to be the wet areas of the world getting wetter and the dry areas getting drier, which is problematic. And as for nuclear power, some people - including the Guardian's George Monbiot - see it as an uncomfortable but perhaps necessary way out of the climate crisis, but the very long-term storage of nuclear waste is a problem still to be solved.
 Kee from London asked: 
How much impact do long-haul flights have? How does the impact compare with, say, driving a car, or using electrical household appliances every day?
My colleague Niko Kommenda recently published an excellent calculator showing what impact flights have. Whether you can offset the emissions from such flights by cutting carbon in other aspects depends on how many flights you take and where to.
 Niko from Germany asked:
What is your estimate on how much renewables capacity Europe needs to build to meet its climate targets? My rough guess is between 30-40 GW per year, that would equal about 600 wind turbines per month, that's quite a challenge (other forms of renewables are of course available).
The International Energy Agency and the European Environment Agency are the best sources.
Stephen from Cheshire asked:
Whatever happened to the plant a tree in '73 campaigns I grew up with in the 1970s? Surely now is a good time to kickstart this again with planting in every public space and private garden. Fruit trees also feed us and wildlife. I have planted hundreds of trees over the years. Ultimately, however, the planet is simply overcrowded. My wife and I chose to be child free so we've done our bit...
I love the plant a tree in 73 campaign as I used to have some of the stickers! Planting trees is part of the UK government response but so far targets have been missed. Today my colleague Rowena Mason reports on an NHS tree planting campaign.
Updated at 2.56pm BST
2.33pm BST
Thousands of French youngsters skipped school to march through Paris. Claude Guyon, a cinema decorator and sculptor, was dressed as a Brazilian tribal leader and carried a "sacred rattle". He said: 
I'm here to represent the guardians of the Earth from north and South America. The tribal leader, who is a woman, gave me this headdress so I could be here today as an ambassador for her.
Claude Guyon, dressed as a Brazilian tribal leader, at the Paris climate strike.Photograph: Kim Willsher/The Guardian
Updated at 2.36pm BST
2.26pm BST
Primary school headteacher Scott McFarlane took the morning off work to attend the Middlesborough climate strike with his wife, who is also a teacher, and his nine-year-old son, who is a pupil at his school. 
During the strike, dozens of protesters staged a "die in" in the North Yorkshire town's Centre Square - lying on the pavement for seven minutes to illustrate the rate at which it is believed species are becoming extinct. 
A 'die-in' led by climate strikers in Middlesborough.Photograph: Scott McFarlane/Guardian Community
McFarlane allowed other children at Stokesley primary academy to take part in the strikes if they wished, giving them an "education other than at school" mark on the register. 
While not many took up the offer, he said the fact that so many young people seemed to be engaged with environmental activism had given him hope. 
"I think Greta Thunberg's an absolute idol. We've got kids at school who last year were coming dressed as Ariana Grande, but have now changed their hairstyles to look like Greta," said McFarlane. 
Climate strikers in Middlesborough.Photograph: Scott McFarlane/Guardian Community
McFarlane, who is a member of Extinction Rebellion Teesside, said he and his son would be striking from the school next month for XR's October Rebellion in London. 
"I am genuinely scared for the future of the human race. Not in the distant future but soon. We have to act," he said. 
"If there's any further action like today, I will always let children have the day off. Not everybody agrees and I'm not asking them to, really. But I hope our example is one that people are starting to take on board." 
Updated at 2.31pm BST
2.23pm BST
Of all the venues globally that will host climate strike protests today, none can surpass Miami Beach for poignancy. Florida's poster-city for sea level rise will sink under seven feet of water by the end of the century, if scientists' predictions are realised, and already it takes only a high tide and a rainy day to send            floodwaters surging inland.
These dark clouds are why student climate activists from all over South Florida will gather at Miami Beach city hall this morning to reinforce their message that more needs to be done. At the most recent youth strike in May, barely four dozen waved placards and called for action - but today students will walk out of their South Florida schools and assemble there in their hundreds to highlight the urgency of the moment.
Gabriella Marchesani, a Miami high school senior and an organiser of today's rally:
We're told by the adults, 'what you're doing is a good thing, keep up the great work'. But it shouldn't be just 'oh, keep doing what you're doing', it should be 'let me see what I can do to help you. How can I be a climate voter? How can I switch my lifestyle to be more sustainable? How can I lower my carbon footprint?'
She adds: 
We want this to be that historic moment that we look back on and say that was the day we got it changed. That was the day we were able to make people hear us, and create legislation and address this crisis.
Updated at 2.29pm BST
2.21pm BST
Andreu from Valencia, Spain asked:
According to scientists, the "natural evolution" of the sun will lead to major climate change here on the Earth. So, what role, if any, does solar activity (solar winds, solar flares, sunspots) play in climate change right now? Are we missing something, have we miscalculated or does the sun have nothing to do with climate change at this point?
Changes in the sun's activity are not causing the climate change and global heating we are currently experiencing. They are caused by human actions, chiefly burning fossil fuels and changing land use, as successive reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have conclusively shown. 
Alex from Warwickshire asked:
The electrification of small vehicles is seen as an achievable near-term step towards cutting emissions, but to replace a significant fraction of the current fossil-fuelled fleet would presumably require a drastic increase in the global extraction and use of 'rare-earth' metals for battery manufacture. How well do we currently understand the environmental impact of such a change and are there more sustainable battery technologies on the horizon?
In the long term, availability of rare earths will be an important issue but it is equally important to note that there are no serious current supply problems as the manufacturing rates show. Batteries are one of the biggest areas of research and there are multiple avenues being explored, from nanotechnology to graphene and even aluminium, a common metal, as an alternative. Hydrogen fuel cells are another possibility.
 Tracey from Ross-on-Wye asked:
Guy McPherson, an environmental scientist, argues that, due to the protection from the sun's heat attributable to global dimming, if we cut carbon emissions the Earth will heat faster, and the planet will be uninhabitable for any species within a decade. Why is this theory not spoken about or even mentioned by any other leading environmental voices?
Because it is wrong. The dimming of light from the sun owing to aerosols does have a small effect, but as you seem to be pointing out, many of the aerosols are soot, or black carbon. Black carbon actually adds to warming, especially when it falls on snow. Removing black carbon and other short-lived climate pollutants could reduce temperatures by as much as 0.5C as work by Durwood Zaelke and others has clearly shown.
You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find.
Updated at 2.25pm BST
2.19pm BST
Lyra Harris, six, from Islington, London, protesting outside 10 Downing Street, said: 
Stop this nonsense. Our Earth is getting too hot. We have to act now for everyone. It's not just for humans, climate change harms the animals too.
Lyra Harris, six, protesting outside Downing StreetPhotograph: The Guardian
Updated at 2.21pm BST
2.13pm BST
Over in Greece it is pupils who have been leading protests with hundreds pouring into Athens' main plaza, Syntaga square. 
Ariadni, 15, holding a hand-drawn placard of a weeping planet under a halo of heat said: 
I am here to raise awareness. There's not much time left. This is global. People need to be informed and they need to act now.
Maria Makarem, the 16-year-old who had helped organise the strike said the protesters had ended up in front of the parliament to ram home the message that urgent times call for urgent measures. 
"They have to understand, all the politicians in there, that we are the new generation and we want change," she said, her own placard proclaiming: "Our world, our future, our choice." 
Yiannis Marangakis and Foivos Anastadiades, both aged 10 and both taken out of class by their mothers Daniella and Myrtia to attend the protest, had an even simpler message: "The earth is very important to us. We have to save it." 
Lena and Ariadni stand in front of the Greek parliament with weeping planet sign.Photograph: Helena Smith/The Guardian
Updated at 2.18pm BST
2.06pm BST
This shows the scale of the march in Edinburgh:
The Edinburgh climate march is loooooooooong! I didn't get anywhere near the end. #schoolstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/kIatZ2Pm6V
 - jonathanwatts (@jonathanwatts) September 20, 2019
2.02pm BST
Ian Mantgani, 36, is striking in London today. He says: 
We have to put pressure on our employers, MPs and friends. We need a new power grid and electric cars on the road or we're toast. Keep pressuring those in power for concrete change and keep pressuring them when they give you mealy mouthed answers. I believe that's the best way forward for change."
ianPhotograph: Ian Mantgani
Updated at 2.04pm BST
1.56pm BST
Chris from South Africa asked:
Why are we not seeing a rise in sea levels? Could it perhaps partly be due to the fact that rainfall across the SAHEL region that is rapidly greening is 40m olympic swimming pools up on a few years ago?
We are seeing a rise in sea levels. And sea levels alone are not the biggest problem: storm and tidal surges are much worse when sea levels are even slightly higher, with the power to overtop our sea defences.
Desertification is increasing in many parts of Africa, with climate change one of the reasons but not the only one (overgrazing and land use changes also play a major role).
Artur from Crewe asked: 
Are we prepared to do real things to tackle climate change? We can say do this or do that but our use of social media takes significant resources. The cheap food, cheap technology, new mobiles released every year is driven by customers not the other way around so how many are actually genuinely prepared to change their way of life? 
People are increasingly understanding that lifestyle changes are necessary, from veganism and flexitarian diets to changing our travel habits. Renewable energy such as wind and solar is already cheaper or on a par with fossil fuels in many areas, and its deployment is increasing fast.
A Guardian reader from London who wanted to remain anonymous asked:
How democratic is it that a secondary school threatens their pupils with being expelled if they participate in today's strike? How are we teaching 'British values' to our kids if in their school are not allowed to protest for something that fully impacts their future? What will it be next? Forbid them to participate in any human rights support act?
Schools will make their own judgment, but engaging children with a subject of huge importance in scientific, political and historical terms might strike many teachers as a great opportunity. The climate emergency relates to chemistry, physics, biology, geography, history, social studies - you could probably even fit it into a load of other lessons too. Why not see this as an opportunity to engage pupils rather than turn them off?
Derek from West Sussex asked:
The UK has a good record of deploying offshore wind generation. What I don't understand is why we aren't deploying wave power and tidal power generation? We have the most coastline per head of any major European country. Wave power never stops, unlike wind, it is more energy dense than wind, and it could have other benefits like reducing coastal erosion.
Tidal power solutions likewise are always available and energy dense. There is an ecological cost in habitats but a balance is needed here. Do we really think that the ecological cost of a tidal barrier is worse than a nuclear power station? There is an ecological cost to farmland too, but we need to eat, so we cut down all the forests we had in medieval times to make room for agriculture. We just need to make some room for power generation too.
The UK is a world leader on offshore wind, as the latest green power auctions show. Wave and tidal power have proved more difficult, in the latter case partly owing to the changes that would be required to landscape a tidal lagoon. But as public subsidy is less needed for wind and solar as prices have come down, it might become possible to spend more of it on wave and tidal power - they may prove cheaper than the high costs agreed to by the government for nuclear energy.
Updated at 2.03pm BST
1.55pm BST
The mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, received a warm applause at the city's climate protest when he gave a speech pledging that "fracking is the past, it is not the future" - but by far the biggest cheers went to a 10-year-old girl called Lillia who took to the stage next. The local schoolgirl, with a high-pitched Mancunian accent and fluorescent ear-defenders tied to her backpack, gave a rousing speech taking aim at politicians for their "lies" - before turning directly to Burnham. 
Lies, when you don't count the airport in the emission figures! Lies, when we have 1,200 air pollution related deaths in Manchester just last year - but they plan to build a huge car park right next door to a school in Ancoats.
Lies when the pension funds of Manchester are still investing £1.4bn in fossil fuel companies ... Lies, in April the mayor Andy Burnham, when I asked if he would support us. I asked for more than publicity stunt pictures. Where's the action?
To huge cheers, she continued: 
Today I woke up to the images around the world of a million people striking and my heart lifted because I knew we weren't alone in our fight. Thank you for coming out to support us. Thank you for having the courage to fight for our future! 
To adults I say, you have the power to vote you need to keep amplifying our voices. We the youth cannot wait until we are old enough - we need action now. 
Greater Manchester mayor @AndyBurnhamGM addresses climate protest: "My generation has failed you - and I include myself in that". Loud cheer greets his declaration that "fracking is the past - it does not belong in the future."            pic.twitter.com/QeQqrUpAE4
 - Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) September 20, 2019
Updated at 1.59pm BST
1.41pm BST
Numbers at Berlin's Klimastreik have reached 100,000, it has just been announced.
Carola Rackete, the SeaWatch Captain who was arrested in Italy several weeks ago addressed Berlin's Klimastreik, to huge applause. 
She told them: 
We adults are responsible for the fact that the Earth is dying... we should not be under the illusion that our individual actions can... turn the situation around.
She paid tribute to "the children and young people who have campaigned tirelessly for over a year... and managed to get this issue to the top of the political agenda".
She said temperatures could be expected to rise by 4-6C by the end of the century. Extinction Rebellion, to which she belongs, was telling the truth when it predicted the collapse of human civilisation as a result. We can no longer stop global heating, she said, "it's too late", but we can "reduce greenhouse gases with immediate effect".
Students take part in the global climate strike of the Fridays for Future movement in Berlin, Germany.Photograph: Christian Mang/Reuters
Updated at 1.51pm BST
1.38pm BST
Sarah from Cardiff asked: 
What are the advantages people will see and experience through the changes we need to make due to climate change? For example, I believe cycling rather than driving will make people healthier, shopping locally rather than online increases daily interactions. Do you envisage the activists and media managing to put this side of the crisis across?
Cleaning up greenhouse gases has myriad beneficial side effects, including cleaner air as diesel and petrol cars are taken off the roads in favour of electric vehicles, public transport and walking or cycling. Our knowledge of the harms of air pollution has expanded dramatically in the past few years: we now know air pollutants can be found in all human organs, and it is linked not only to respiratory problems and heart disease but also dementia, developmental problems and miscarriage.
In some ways, the cleaning up of air pollution is easier to explain than climate chaos because people can see and feel air pollution more clearly than the link between invisible carbon dioxide and extreme weather, and increasingly air pollution campaigners are making the link with climate benefits from moving away from coal and diesel in particular.
Louis from London asked: 
Today is wonderful to see - the energy and passion - but how can you be sure we haven't left it too late ? There is a climate doomosphere - I'm thinking Paul Beckwith, Peter Wadhams and others who suggest overwhelming events in the next decade or two. Can they be dismissed as fringe cranks?
Climate change is a problem for today, not the distant future, and the effects are already being seen, as we have extensively reported. But there is still time to stave off the worst effects if we take action on emissions now.
The IPCC has said emissions must be effectively zero by around mid-century to hold the world to no more than 1.5C of warning, and every effort to bring down emissions helps towards that goal. But there are scary things we know less about: tipping points, which could cause runaway heating to take hold. These include Arctic sea ice melt, which reveals dark sea instead of reflective ice, creating more warming, and the melting permafrost that releases methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, in a vicious circle. 
Some have suggested we turn our efforts to adapting to climate change instead of cutting emissions. But adapting without cutting emissions is like trying to mop up an overflowing sink with the taps still running. The truth is we need to do both, and urgently.
You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find.
Updated at 2.19pm BST
1.37pm BST
Just to stand back from the breathless enthusiasm of the protests for a moment, our environment editor, Damian Carrington, has been pulling out a series of charts that highlight the scale of the challenge - and the beginnings of some solutions.
Perhaps the most important one is this: the planet's average temperature started a steady climb two centuries ago, but has rocketed since the second world war as consumption and population has risen. Global heating means there is more energy in the atmosphere, making extreme weather events more frequent and more intense.
chart
We have also tried to capture this alarming rise in temperatures in a startling piece of music. Alas, it is not a banger, so is unlikely to become a global anthem for the Friday strikes movement.
150 years of global warming in a minute-long symphony
But it's not all gloom and doom. The three charts below show the progress we have made, in renewable energy generation, electric vehicle production, and battery development.
Chart           Chart           chart
Updated at 1.45pm BST
1.30pm BST
Your climate crisis questions answered
Today's climate strikes highlight a crucial fact: that our actions in the next few years will decide the world's future, and whether we can avoid the worst ravages of global heating or succumb to climate chaos.
We must effectively eliminate greenhouse gas emissions, and nurture the natural world enough to absorb the remainder, by mid-century to avoid a future of catastrophic and irreversible climate chaos. Extreme weather is already driving 2 million people a week to seek humanitarian aid, and that is set to rise to 150 million in the next decade alone.
The Guardian will try to answer your questions on the climate strikes and the forces shaping them. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find.
Updated at 1.40pm BST
1.24pm BST
Guardian environment journalist Fiona Harvey will be on hand to answer any questions you have about the climate crisis between 1.30pm and 2.30pm BST. 
You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find.
Updated at 1.26pm BST
1.23pm BST
The ?? @guardian ? office at 12:28pm today            #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/HbEQNwldvP
 - Nikhita Chulani (@NChulani) September 20, 2019
1.14pm BST
The US is set to stage its largest ever day of protest over the climate crisis, with tens of thousands of students set to be joined by adults in abandoning schools and workplaces for a wave of strikes across the country.
Climate strikes will take place in more than 1,000 locations, with major rallies in New York, Washington DC, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco and Miami. 
The young strikers' totemic figure, Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, will take part in the New York walkout and will speak to massed protesters in Manhattan. 
Authorities in New York City have announced that its student population of 1.1 million is allowed to skip school in order to attend the strikes. 
Dozens of companies, including Patagonia and Ben and Jerry's, will support striking staff, with major unions also backing the walkouts. 
Dulce Belen Ceballos Arias, an 18-year-old from San Francisco, said she will be striking because "I want children of my own and I want them to have a better life than me. I don't want that to be taken away by climate change." 
Students in Boston will also be excused school, with a crowd of 10,000 expected to assemble. "We are excited to disrupt business as usual, to demand a Green New Deal," said Audrey Maurine Xin Lin, an 18-year-old organizer in Boston, in reference to the resolution put forward by progressive Democrats to enact a second world war-style mobilization to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions. 
Updated at 1.21pm BST
1.12pm BST
A big difference on today's march in London is the presence of trade union activists alongside young people and their parents, writes Guardian environment correspondent Matthew Taylor, 
Graham Petersen, from the UCU lecturers' union and member of the green jobs alliance, said unions had to take a lead in the climate fight. 
This is going to be the defining issue for future generations and if we are not involved now how are we going to be relevant to the young people here today when they go into work.
Trade unions around the world are backing today's protests and Petersen said it was "about time" they engaged in the climate crisis.
In the UK it is difficult because people have their hands full with austerity and precarious jobs but unions are starting to realise that if we get the climate justice policies right we can tackle not just the climate but also a wider social justice issues.
Trade unionists join today's climate march in London. "This is going to be the defining issue for future generations and if we are not involved now how are we going to be relevant to the young people here today." pic.twitter.com/JtxKByvwfc
 - Matthew Taylor (@mrmatthewtaylor) September 20, 2019
Lois Borny has been speaking to young people on the London march, including student Noemie, who told her:
It's depressing knowing you're waking up to not such a bright future. The climate crisis has always been in the back of my mind, but I always used to be a bit of a pessimist... now that the movement has gained traction you get the feeling that you can change something.
When asked what she thinks about the fact children are leading the movement she says: 
It almost seems like a game for them [the politicians]. They aren't taking it seriously. This isn't for fun or just for the sake of it. It's real and urgent.
It is Nazreen's first day in London, having arrived from Malaysia yesterday. The 22-year-old, who is studying political philosophy, said: 
I'm happy this is happening because at home we have a big haze problem, because of forests being burned in Borneo.
Nazreen says that if we were in Borneo, from where we are standing (by the stage) the Houses of Parliament would be unrecognisable from the haze. 
Borneo is burning. It has one of the oldest rainforest in the world and half of it is gone. We are really proud of our rainforests, but what is there to be proud of when it is gone?
He says that it is good children are leading the movement, because it is allowing them to see "what is happening in the real world".
Updated at 1.24pm BST
1.03pm BST
A small but noisy crowd gathered in the financial district of Sandton in Johannesburg, outside the offices of Sasol, a huge South African energy and chemical company. 
Natalie Kapsosideris, 16, said: 
We don't really have a way out of this. The future looks really dismal at this point. There's not going to be a lot of food available, there will be droughts, floods, natural disasters. The fact that Sasol gets away with stealing our future from us... and it's all because they want to make money. 
Tariro Banganayi, 18, a student at Sacred Heart college, said: 
It's important that I lend my voice to this cause... a lot of people who aren't as privileged as I am don't have the opportunity to speak out against these sorts of issues, who live where the air is unbreathable, where toxic waste is dumped in rivers, those people don't have a voice to speak out... Also I am here to educate people about these issues and to get as much information from as many different places as I can... I am going to try to diversify the way that I raise awareness... I am going to use my social media a lot more effectively, I am going to centre my conversations with my friends, I am going to bring it up at the dinner table with my family... because if every person tells one person then we can tell everybody.
Climate protesters demonstrate outside the local government legislature's offices in Johannesburg, South AfricaPhotograph: Themba Hadebe/AP
Updated at 1.07pm BST
12.57pm BST
Crowds of students in Delhi are blocking the road near to Lodhi Gardens, chanting: "What do we want? Climate justice." "You can't run away from climate change," reads one sign. 
Delhi is one of 21 cities predicted to run out of groundwater by 2020, according to the Indian government's policy thinktank, Niti Aayog. 
It is also one of the most polluted cities in the world."The lungs of an 11 year old have black spots on them," Shivam, a law student, says. "This is why we have to change things now."
Climate Strike IndiaPhotograph: Rebecca Ratcliffe/The Guardian
Updated at 1.01pm BST
12.55pm BST
In Exeter, the protest is in full swing. Leon Hayton-Twigg, 11, (pictured below with his brother Lucas and his friend Ossian Finn, 10) says: "We have come here to show the people there's a problem and we want it to stop."
Leon Hayton-Twigg (right), with Ossian (left) and Lucas.Photograph: Marietta d'Erlanger
More of the protest signs from the Exeter strikes...
Global climate strike, Exeter.Photograph: Marietta d'ErlangerGlobal climate strike, Exeter.Photograph: Marietta d'ErlangerGlobal climate strike, Exeter.Photograph: Marietta d'Erlanger
Updated at 1.56pm BST
12.51pm BST
Archie Graham, 15, and his friends were supposed to be in school today but felt compelled to join Manchester's climate strike, while still rocking their school ties. 
He said: 
What's the point in going to school if we can't use that knowledge in the future because there won't be a future for us.
His friend, Sam Pembroke, added: 
It's really important because there's no second chance - this is the only chance we have. If this carries on it's just going to end.
Their friend, Santana Daza, 15, said they might get in trouble for bunking off school but it was worth it: 
I think it definitely does make a difference. They encourage us to learn about it but we all know about climate change - we don't need to be educated about it, it's more about taking action.
Herding a group of six placard-carrying children, Kitty Rostron, 40, said her seven-year-old daughter Margot watches Greta Thunberg on YouTube and asks: 
Why is this happening? Why is Boris Johnson not doing anything? Why do people not make good decisions about climate change?
Her friend Karine Joshua, 39, said it was important to bring children along so they understand what is happening to the environment: 
There's a real crisis right now, not in 10, 20 years time. Action is needed now so we're trying to teach them if we come together and show our support hopefully we can make a change.
Archie Graham, 15, and his mates were supposed to be in school today: "What's the point in going to school if we can't use that knowledge in future because there won't be a future for us?" pic.twitter.com/iydpMOSL19
 - Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) September 20, 2019
12.44pm BST
Here is a selection of images from other climate strikers:
#ClimateStrike Bristol            pic.twitter.com/y6xAxJEXjw
 - Andy Davies (@adavies4) September 20, 2019
Huge turnout for today's #ClimateStrike in Oxford - west end of Broadstreet and Cornmarket completely full            pic.twitter.com/oBgb8WBrr1
 - Cherwell (@Cherwell_Online) September 20, 2019
Amazing scenes on Brighton sea front right now. This goes on for miles. pic.twitter.com/Z6BKVXYClN
 - Matt Haig (@matthaig1) September 20, 2019
#ClimateActionNow strikes already unfolding across the globe - these are some of the first views out of Australia of thousands taking to the streets for the global            #climatestrike - major events in Ann Arbor and Detroit today.            pic.twitter.com/iTjYTGIgK7
 - Matthew Smith (@MattSmithWXYZ) September 20, 2019
#Climatestrike           #Paris           pic.twitter.com/AKapTJB8FB
 - Saskya Vandoorne (@SaskyaCNN) September 20, 2019
Thousands of protesters have come today to join the climate strike in #Dortmund.            #ClimateStrike           #FridaysForFuture           #Klimastreiks           pic.twitter.com/CfAUKpNcjn
 - Mazen Hassoun (@HassounMazen) September 20, 2019
12.34pm BST
Hello, this is Haroon Siddique taking over from Sarah. The video below shows a small proportion of the staff who walked out at the Guardian. If you want to get in touch, please tweet me @Haroon_Siddique
#ClimateStrike at the Guardian            pic.twitter.com/MqoUDukDMD
 - Haroon Siddique (@Haroon_Siddique) September 20, 2019
Updated at 12.43pm BST
11.58am BST
The Guardian live blog will be closing from noon (12:00 BST) until 12.30 BST as we are participating in a solidarity strike. When it resumes, my colleague Haroon Siddique will be taking over. 
In an email to staff explaining why we are walking out for 30 minutes, Guardian editor in chief, Katharine Viner, said: 
We fully support this global campaign, and we want colleagues to feel able to show solidarity with campaigners - so we are happy to support this activity across the organisation.
Updated at 12.00pm BST
11.48am BST
Mayors across the world support the strikes
Sadiq Khan is not the only mayor who has come out strongly behind today's strikes. 
The leaders of Paris, New York City, Los Angeles and Copenhagen released a strongly worded joint statement overnight. 
Our shared planet is facing a climate emergency. The science is clear that, without urgent action, sea levels will rise further, extreme temperatures will become the norm and climate-related disasters will inflict even greater damage. We are making historic investments to prepare and adapt our cities to the inevitable consequences of emissions already released into the atmosphere.
When your house is on fire, somebody needs to sound the alarm. Young people in our cities, displaying incredible maturity and dignity are doing just that. School children are taking to the streets, drawing attention to the terrifying threat that climate breakdown poses to their future. Young people recognise just how unfair climate change is. Those who have generated the least greenhouse gas emissions, including the poorest, most disadvantaged and youngest in society, will suffer the worst effects of a rapidly changing global climate. They are right to sound the alarm, and they are right to demand action that tackles climate change and inequality simultaneously. 
On September 20, these inspiring young leaders have called for adults to join them for a Global Climate Strike. We have an opportunity to show, not only that we hear their message, but that they have inspired us to act even faster. 
As mayors, our greatest responsibility is to protect the lives and wellbeing of those that live in our cities. As adults, our obligation is to leave the world in a better state for our children than we inherited it. Fortunately, the evidence is increasingly clear that transforming our cities to prevent the climate crisis will also make them healthier, more equitable, safer and ultimately better places to live. The cities of the future will enjoy affordable and reliable public transport; the air will be free from poisonous toxins; buildings will generate zero emissions thanks to ultra-high efficient heating, cooling and insulation; waste will be recycled or reused, and all of this will be powered by abundant renewable energy. We have a unique opportunity to bestow a bright and hopeful legacy to the next generation. This is the future we want.
That is why we are supporting the Global Climate Strikes. Mayors around the world, working through C40 Cities, are committed to deliver on the Paris Agreement and taking action to peak their emissions as our cities already have and bring them down sharply by 2030. Many businesses, investors, labour groups, faith leaders and local communities share our urgency. But we cannot tackle the climate crisis alone. We need science-based action from every sector of the economy, and we expect greater leadership from nation states. Young people are telling us that the climate emergency demands an emergency response. We couldn't agree more. 
It was signed by the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, as well as the mayor of Los Angeles, Eric Garcetti, and the lord mayor of Copenhagen, Frank Jensen.
Updated at 11.54am BST
11.43am BST
Lovely thread by Mary Hamilton on what to do if you cannot make the strikes today but still want to make an effort to reduce your waste.
So for a little while I've been trying to reduce the amount of waste I produce, especially plastic, and of the various things I've tried there are two that make me happiest: 1) milk delivery 2) wormery
- Mary Hamilton is stockpiling schadenfreude (@newsmary) September 20, 2019
All of which is also by way of saying that if you - like me -can't #climatestrike today for whatever reason, there are other things you can do to join in. Not everyone can do worms or milk delivery obvs. Would love to hear more ideas.
- Mary Hamilton is stockpiling schadenfreude (@newsmary) September 20, 2019
Useful links! Find a milk delivery service in your area: https://t.co/qCl1iG1iUVComposting/wormeries:            https://t.co/IMTdcZ8YBp works with some local councils, but usually easier to google [your local council] + "wormery" as each council seems to have its own scheme
- Mary Hamilton is stockpiling schadenfreude (@newsmary) September 20, 2019
Updated at 11.44am BST
11.40am BST
Greater Manchester mayor @AndyBurnhamGM addresses climate protest: "My generation has failed you - and I include myself in that". Loud cheer greets his declaration that "fracking is the past - it does not belong in the future."            pic.twitter.com/QeQqrUpAE4
 - Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) September 20, 2019
11.37am BST
Ruby, 10, and Dougie, 7, (pictured below), were the first to start striking outside the Scottish parliament, back on a cold dark 11 January. Back then it was just them and the police. Seeing how big the movement has become, Ruby says she feels "happy and proud". "Amazing," says Dougie. 
Updated at 11.42am BST
11.35am BST
Staff at the Guardian will be striking today at noon, so there will be no posts on the live blog between 12:00 BST and 12:30 BST.
11.32am BST
Making carbon-neutral clothes out of algae: the designers taking on fast fashion - video
The fashion industry is a fossil-fuel-guzzling operation, as many of our clothes are made from petroleum-based textiles such as polyester. Even natural fibres such as cotton have a huge carbon footprint and require a large portion of the world's pesticides. 
In a bid to solve this disastrous environmental equation, scientists and designers are creating completely new textiles from fast-growing, carbon-sucking organisms such as micro- and macro-algae, mycelium (elements of fungus), bacteria and fermented yeast. These new biotechnologies efficiently convert sunlight and CO2 into mass raw materials, suck carbon out of the atmosphere and pave the way to a carbon-negative wardrobe.
Updated at 11.35am BST
11.29am BST
Tens of thousands of young people and adults are already streaming into the streets around Westminster in central London, and organisers say the protest, which was formally due to start at 11am, already dwarfs previous school strike demonstrations.
Among those gathered in the sunshine were a group of medics. Isobel Braithwaite, a public health doctor from London, said they were there because the climate crisis was also a health crisis: "From heatwaves to floods; food shortages to devastating storms, these things are having a huge impact on health now and it is going to get worse."
She said it was time adults listened to young people who had taken the lead in addressing this crisis. "We need urgent widespread action and it must happen quickly... we are running out of time."
Medics join tens of thousands of climate strikers in London. "The climate crisis is a health crisis... we are running out of time." pic.twitter.com/pDXL7jF9OP
 - Matthew Taylor (@mrmatthewtaylor) September 20, 2019
Updated at 11.33am BST
11.24am BST
Glorious scenes in Edinburgh as thousands of children, parents, students and musicians gather at the Meadows for the Climate Strike. "This is our Earth and our future. We need to take care of it," said 11-year-old Leila Koita, pictured here with friends Eilidh Tedesco, Norah Turner, Tilly Torrie, Megan Berger and Nan Zhang. Norah's mum, Jo Spencely, says she hasn't been on a demo for decades but she is here to show support. "I'm massively concerned about their future. I almost can't bear to read about the climate. It's so scary." The march sets off at 11:30am and will pass through Edinburgh city centre and end with a rally in front of the Scottish parliament. As in London, police have imposed restrictions, in this case by refusing permission for the marchers to walk down Princes Street. As elsewhere, this is just the start of a week of climate action. On Saturday, activists will stage a "die in", Monday will be a "day of disruption", musicians will join a "Love the Planet festival" on Wednesday, and there'll be another rally outside parliament the following day. edinbughlPhotograph: Jonathan Watts
Updated at 11.29am BST
11.19am BST
Even Emmeline Pankhurst has joined in the protests in Manchester. A statue of the suffragette hero has donned a bright orange lifejacket and has a placard that asks: "Ready for rising sea levels to reach this height?" The stunt was the idea of Katie Bradshaw and Ryan Griffiths, both 31, who described themselves as first-protesters who felt the need to act today. "Emmeline still carries that Mancunian spirit of standing up for what she believes in and great causes," said Griffiths. "Climate change is so important and we think it's an issue she would be at the forefront of if she were around today." Bradshaw added: "We've got to do our bit, even if it's just putting some signs up and making people realise we need to look after our planet. If she was around today she'd be supporting it."
Emmeline Pankhurst showing the world the way in Manchester pic.twitter.com/Z1TFjYCAuN
 - Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) September 20, 2019
Updated at 11.26am BST
11.12am BST
Friends of the Earth, an international network of environmental organisations in 74 countries, is calling on people across Britain to join young people in striking against climate change.
Muna Suleiman, a Friends of the Earth campaigner, said: 
Most of us want to fix the climate crisis. And it can be done. But we need our politicians to act. Climate breakdown is already hurting people around the world, with many of those who have contributed least to the crisis being subjected to the harshest impacts.
"And right when we need our leaders to step up, they continue to let us down. From filling the skies with more planes, to backing fracking in the UK and funding oil and gas projects abroad.
"That's why we're standing shoulder to shoulder with young people to call on our politicians to deliver emergency climate action now. And we're asking everyone to join us."
\Photograph: Friends of the Earth
Updated at 11.20am BST
11.08am BST
Bob Dylan's Blowin' in the Wind kicks off Berlin's "Klimastreik" to huge cheers from the thousands gathered, although no official estimates of the numbers attending are available yet. Contender for banner of the day is: 'Grandpa what is a snowman?' Hundreds of people are streaming through the portals of the Brandenburg Gate, through the Tiergarten Park and from every direction onto Platz des 18. März.
Lots of Berlin's young are here with the blessing of their parents and teachers, though many have defied their schools to be here. 
Updated at 11.09am BST
11.05am BST
At 1pm, the student strikers are planning to let off alarm clocks across the UK, and are encouraging businesses to set off their fire alarms at the same time in support. Jake Woodier, the campaign co-ordinator at UK Student Climate Network, said: "Young people across the world have taken the lead in highlighting the need for urgent climate action over the past year. "They are calling for adults to join them for the global climate strike, just three days before the UN climate action summit to pressure our governments to act to tackle the climate crisis. "Raise the Alarm will help draw attention to the climate emergency in workplaces across the breadth of the UK," Woodier said. 
Updated at 11.06am BST
11.02am BST
Students at Torquay Girls' Grammar school have made a video about climate change.
Updated at 11.06am BST
10.55am BST
What's the carbon footprint of my trip?
default 
10.51am BST
The square outside Manchester's grand central library has been taken over by a sea of people carrying homemade placards and chanting. Hundreds of those gathered sang "Whose planet? Our planet!" with scores of children among the protesters. Nellie Jacobs, 10, and her mother Helen said they were motivated to take part in the global climate strike after their hometown Whaley Bridge was evacuated earlier this month when it was deluged with months-worth of rain in a short period, causing a dam to burst and dozens of properties to flood. 
Nellie Jacobs, 10, and her mum Helen felt compelled to be at the climate strike in Manchester after the serious flooding in their hometown Whaley Bridge this month pic.twitter.com/sNjlmRcXKb
 - Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) September 20, 2019
Updated at 10.54am BST
10.51am BST
Nice cartoon just in from reader Jesse Leonard. You get the picture, literally. Possibly the first time the climate crisis has been likened to a purple piano, but why not?
CartoonPhotograph: Jesse Leonard
If there are any other artists out there with climate emergency sketches/drawings/cartoons, send them in via this link. 
10.50am BST
Why are people striking - a video on the environment challenges in Ecuador
The Kichwa tribe in the Sarayaku region of the Amazon in Ecuador believe in the "living forest", where humans, animals and plants live in harmony. They are fighting oil companies who want to exploit their ancestral land. A delegation of indigenous people are at the Paris COP21 climate conference to make sure their voices are heard. Can they win their battle?
The Amazonian tribespeople who sailed down the Seine
10.46am BST
Tweeting a photo from a climate strike, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said:
Young people here and across the world are making it impossible to ignore the environment and climate emergency. This is the wonderful youth #ClimateStrike in my constituency - now I'm on my way to the main London demonstration.            pic.twitter.com/GI1AniUnpb
 - Jeremy Corbyn (@jeremycorbyn) September 20, 2019
Updated at 10.49am BST
10.43am BST
Kate Connolly, the Guardian and Observer's Berlin correspondent, has been out this morning in the German capital.
Crowds gathering now at Brandenburg Gate. Lots of kids who are missing school, some with teachers' blessing, many without pic.twitter.com/zcvOhYMM9U
 - Kate Connolly (@connollyberlin) September 20, 2019
Climate activist Robin Wood performing the most precarious feat of the day so far by hanging over the A100 Berlin motorway under the banner "clean cars - a pure lie" https://t.co/JbWxaIu0II
 - Kate Connolly (@connollyberlin) September 20, 2019
10.37am BST
Strikes take place across Africa
Strikes are planned for at least seven Nigerian cities, such as Lagos, which is clogged by mountains of toxic waste including thousands of tons of e-waste from the EU,            particularly the UK and Germany. There will be a protest in Port Harcourt, capital of the country's oil-producing region, whose residents and their possessions have been covered in soot for the past few years, believed to be the result of            destroying illegal oil refineries.
There will also be two protests against a proposed coal plant in San Pedro in Ivory Coast, while in Ghana, a group called Young Reporters for the Environment is leading a march from the city hall of the capital, Accra. 
Next Friday, there will be a demonstration in Kumasi, the capital of Ghana's Ashanti region. Ghana is losing its rainforests faster than any other country, with a 60% increase in primary forest loss from 2017 to 2018.
In Senegal, there are marches in Rufisque and Thies this Friday, a climate camp in Kaolack on Sunday, followed by a demonstration against a new coal plant            in Bargny, and a march in the capital, Dakar on the 27th. Air pollution in Dakar is causing            more and more respiratory problems, in large part because of "dirty", sulphur-laden diesel. 
Updated at 10.51am BST
10.32am BST
Environmental activists Greta Thunberg and George Monbiot have helped produce a short film highlighting the need to protect, restore and use nature to tackle the climate crisis.
10.21am BST
Berlin's main transport line, the S-Bahn, has virtually ground to a halt this morning due to a major engineering breakdown leaving many protesters stranded and unable to reach the protest. Participants are being encouraged to take their bikes instead. Many have pointed out the irony.
Meanwhile, at the Brandenburg Gate, scene of the main protest in Berlin that is due to kick off just before noon, protesters have been organised into neat blocks.
Updated at 10.28am BST
10.15am BST
Apart from the huge crowds of protesters, the other uplifting piece of climate news today is that onshore wind has just became the cheapest source of energy in the UK. Industry analysts can't believe how quickly the price has fallen. This shows the transition away from fossil fuels is much more affordable than people dared hope five years ago. On the business side of things, also encouraging to note efforts by companies with a green reputation, who seem to be competing to do more by selling less. The Patagonia outdoor clothing store will close all its European outlets today and next Friday so staff can join the protests. Ben & Jerry's and Lush also shutting today. Burton, the winter sports chain, is giving workers a paid day off to join the strike and have halted online sales for 24 hours. The company's webpage today reads "Closed for business. Open for action. Let's protect our playground." 
Updated at 10.20am BST
10.07am BST
In London, where big crowds are expected to gather near Westminster from 11am, the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, has thrown his weight behind today's strikes. 
He told the Guardian this morning he fully supports schools across the city who are "working with pupils and allowing them time, without sanction, to peacefully and lawfully join the strikes today". "It is unbelievable that we need strike action for the future of our planet to be taken seriously by government's around the world," he said. 
"I fully support the thousands of young people peacefully and lawfully protesting around the country today who feel so strongly about the climate change emergency and I share their frustration. The stark reality is we are running out of time for meaningful change. The climate crisis is one of the very biggest challenges we face - I have declared a climate emergency in London - and governments around the world are failing to take the action we need."
Updated at 10.25am BST
10.02am BST
Berlin has kicked off its Fridays For Future this morning with road blockades, cycle rallies and a demonstration in front of the cuboid chancellery of Angela Merkel, where about 40 young people have unfurled a banner asking: "Return of the climate chancellor?" 
Police remove plastic cordons as trucks and cars wait after climate activists blocked Jannowitz Bridge.Photograph: Axel Schmidt/AFP/Getty Images
It's an appeal to Merkel, once environment minister, to live up to the reputation she is seen to have squandered over everything from her support of the car industry to her refusal to back a phase-out of brown coal mining. 
They are keen to pressurise her coalition government ahead of the launch of its much-awaited package of climate emergency measures which the cabinet has spent the night negotiating and is due to launch early this afternoon. The protesters are chanting: "Wir sind hier, wir sind laut, weil Ihr uns die Zukunft raubt." -"We are here and we are loud, because you're stealing our future". The main protest at the Brandenburg Gate is due to start just before noon.
Updated at 10.21am BST
9.56am BST
A view from Germany: 400 protests have been announced across the country
When there is protest in Berlin, there is usually also techno, and from 3pm a "Rave Rebellion" march will depart from Potsdamer Platz square, under the motto "No Future No Dancefloor". Extinction Rebellion has announced plans to block traffic at strategic points "where it will hurt drivers" around the capital.
Elsewhere, 400 protests have been announced across the country, which will likely attracts adults as well as children. An umbrella organisation that includes organisations such as "Psychologists for Future", "Entrepreneurs for Future" and "Grandparents for Future" has called for people to join in, as has the services union Verdi and the German Protestant Church. "We stand side by side with Fridays for Future", said Annette Kurschus, the president of the Protestant Church of Westphalia, "Planet Earth does not belong to us, it has only been entrusted in our care".
Germany has two faces when it comes to the environment: the country that prides itself in its high recycling rates, phasing out nuclear power and pioneering renewable energies is still the world's sixth biggest pollutant, with 865m tonnes of CO2 emissions in 2018.
Borne out of this realisation, much of the recent debate in the country has focused on the phase-out of the country's approximately 130 smoke-belching coal plants. The government wants to close them down by 2038 - too soon for many unions, especially in the coal-rich east, and too late for climate activists galvanised by Fridays for Future. In Europe's "car nation", air pollution through exhaust fumes is another contentious issue, with some cities having introduced driving bans for diesel cars last year.
The Fridays for Future protests have had a tangible effect on the political climate, with several polls earlier this year showing the Green party emerging as the strongest political force in the country. Many other parties have tried to copy its message, with even the arch-conservative Bavarian Christian Social Union calling for a coal phase-out by 2030, bans on plastic bags and new wind farms. Angela Merkel's coalition government is expected to announce a plan for tackling climate change, rumoured to involve (EURO)75bn of investment by 2030, just in time for Friday's climate strike.
Updated at 10.08am BST
9.54am BST
A reminder of why people are striking
The planet's average temperature started a steady climb two centuries ago, but has rocketed since the second world war as consumption and population has risen. Global heating means there is more energy in the atmosphere, making extreme weather events more frequent and more intense. 
The consequences - global temperature rise
Updated at 10.09am BST
9.52am BST
Heatwaves, droughts and floods are likely in the future if urgent action isn't taken to stop climate change, experts warn. 
It comes as strikes take place across the world on Friday, calling on governments to take immediate action on climate change. The demonstrates have been planned ahead of the landmark UN climate action summit in New York on 23 September
World leaders will discuss how they can reduce their carbon emissions with the aim of stopping global temperature rise from exceeding 1.5°C under the Paris agreement.
Prof Nigel Arnell, professor of climate system science at the University of Reading: 
This week, the United Nations general assembly will be discussing how to encourage countries to be more ambitious in their targets to reduce future emissions of greenhouse gases. It's clear that increased effort is needed if we are to avoid significant climate change impacts.
We're probably already seeing some of the consequences of climate change - heatwaves, wildfires, unusually slow and intense hurricanes - and things will get much worse if we continue on our current path of increasing emissions.
We recently published a study showing the number of people exposed to major heatwaves would increase from 330 million per year now to up to 8 billion per year in 2050 - just 30 years away - the number people exposed to drought would increase from 400 million per year to up to 1 billion per year, and the number of people affected by flooding from major rivers would increase from 15 million per year now to up to 100 million per year. Reducing emissions now will reduce these impacts, but at the same time we also need to increase efforts to enhance resilience to the impacts that are inevitable following our emissions so far."
Keith Shine, regius professor of meteorology and climate science at the University of Reading:
We are coming to the end of another decade. Each of the past four decades has, when averaged over the whole planet, been 0.1 to 0.2 degrees celsius warmer than the decade before; carbon dioxide levels have continued their relentless rise; and methane levels have grown much more rapidly than in the previous decade. Unless things start to change markedly over the coming decade, it is going to get harder and harder to meet the goals of the UN's Paris agreement on climate change."
Updated at 10.15am BST
9.46am BST
Protests taking place in Johannesburg, South Africa's biggest city and capital of Gauteng province.
Johannesburg #climatestrike is being led by the powerful voices of young people calling for climate justice. We have no choice but to act now if we are to protect our future. We must stand together with the youth to fight carbon capitalism.            pic.twitter.com/SGqjZxGSRk
 - Alex Lenferna (@AlexLenferna) September 20, 2019
9.42am BST
The Guardian environment journalist Fiona Harvey will be on hand to answer any questions you have about the climate crisis between 1.30 and 2.30pm BST. You can            share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find.
Updated at 10.16am BST
9.41am BST
With hundreds of thousands of children joining the global youth strike in cities around the globe, Extinction Rebellion UK said it stands in solidarity with all those striking. 
Caspar Hughes, 48, a Extinction Rebellion activist and father of school striker Max, 12, said: "Parents have left their children to clear up the climate and ecological crisis they have created. The youth should be out partying rather than protesting."
Extinction Rebellion activists will join the strikes in London and are holding their own actions and performances. At 2.30pm, a concert will take place in Victoria Tower Gardens, London.
Updated at 9.44am BST
9.36am BST
'The crisis is already here': young strikers facing climate apartheid
Jonathan Watts, the Guardian's global environment editor, has written about young activists calling for north-south solidarity to the tackle climate emergency. He writes:
While previous generations failed to notice the slowly shifting baselines, today's young will watch the sixth great wave of extinction accelerate before their eyes. Due to warming seas and acid bleaching, coral reef systems will flicker out one by one. Species that existed for millions of years will tip into the abyss. Among those closest to the edge are the black rhino, the Chinese giant salamander, the Siberian crane, the Western gorilla, the Ganges dolphin, Bactrian camels, Pygmi sloths and Attenborough's long-beaked echidna. Thousands of species of insects, plants and amphibians may go extinct before they are discovered. For many young people today, their only chance of seeing unspoiled beaches, savannahs, reefs and forests will be on old documentaries, 3D interactives or their grandparents' holiday videos. Picturesque landscapes that defined communities and nations will be transformed.
Read the full article here. 
Updated at 9.38am BST
9.30am BST
The climate change strikes have spread far and wide, including the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific. 
Amazing photos coming in from the Solomon Islands where they're kicking off the Global #ClimateStrikes.            pic.twitter.com/Ul4SZ4XDWY
 - Jamie Henn (@Agent350) September 20, 2019
Updated at 9.39am BST
9.24am BST
By William Yang in Taipei
In Taiwan, dozens of representatives from primary schools, high schools, and universities gathered in the capital, Taipei, to launch a petition called "Fridays for the future". The aim of it is to press candidates in the upcoming presidential election to lay out concrete policies to mitigate climate change risks that Taiwan faces. 
Some held signs that said: "It's getting hot in here" and "Don't drop it like it's hot", after popular song lyrics.
Student activists spoke on stage, sharing their personal reasons for joining the global campaign to fight climate change. Wei Hung-zhan, aged nine, said: "Our future has been sacrificed by the older generation." 
He asked: "Why hasn't the older generation remembered to share earth's resources with the next generation?" 
Students said that they planned to mail their petitions to each presidential candidate's office and ask politicians to provide complete responses to their demands through online live-broadcasts in a month. The event's organiser Chang Li-Wen said: "The only candidate who cares about Taiwan's future is the person who proposes a complete set of climate change policies." 
Over the next week, a series of climate change events are scheduled across Taiwan, including major rallies in Taipei and Kaohsiung on 27 September.
Updated at 9.27am BST
9.20am BST
People are taking to the streets in Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh, in southern Asia. Climate change in Bangladesh is a pressing issue. According to National Geographic, Bangladesh is one the most vulnerable nations to the impacts of climate change. 
#ClimateStrike in Dhaka, Bangladesh. ??????            pic.twitter.com/3kGdSlKFMT
 - 350 dot org (@350) September 20, 2019
9.18am BST
Protests today: 100 rallies in Australia, and 800 events set to take place in the US
Millions are marching across the globe in what could be the largest climate protest in history. The first of the worldwide protests took place in Australia, where an estimated 300,000 people gathered at more than 100 rallies calling for action to guard against climate change. Other demonstrations were held across parts of Asia. In the UK, children and young people across the country will walk out of lessons and lectures They will be joined by hundreds of thousands of workers. The school strikes movement was sparked by the teenage activist Greta Thunberg who demonstrated at the Swedish parliament. The first large-scale protests of Friday's "global climate strike" took place in Sydney and Canberra, with demonstrators calling on leaders in Australia, the world's largest exporter of coal and liquid natural gas, to take more drastic action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Similar rallies are planned for around the world, with 800 events set to take place in the US and 400 in Germany. The protests come ahead of a climate summit at the UN next week convened by the secretary general, António Guterres, to urge countries to up their climate efforts. Much stronger measures are needed across the globe to prevent temperature rises of more than 1.5C (2.7F) or 2C (3.6F) to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. The Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said: "It is unbelievable that we should need global strike action for the future of our planet to be taken seriously. The stark reality is that our climate is changing rapidly and we are running out of time to address it. "I hope governments around the world who are failing to take action hear the voices of millions of people, young and old, unified in their call for action to save our planet. Our future depends on it." 
Updated at 9.22am BST
9.13am BST
The problem - rising carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
The level of CO2 has been rising since the industrial revolution and is at its highest for about 4 million years. The rate of the rise is even more striking - the fastest for 66m years - with scientists saying we are in "uncharted territory".            Atmospheric CO2
Updated at 9.22am BST
9.09am BST
Strikes are also taking place in Uganda, east Africa. 
Today we rise. @JacobOulanyah. Today the children rise.The            @LilGreenHandsUg children rise up for the kind of future they want to inherit. A Green Sustainabile future!            #ClimateStrike           #GoGreenUg           pic.twitter.com/9hlgRhAOXv
 - Joseph Masembe (@JosephMasembe1) September 20, 2019
They are also under way in Nairobi, Kenya's capital. 
#ClimateStrikeKE underway in Nairobi. Young climate activists demand action against global warming. Demand that the Kenyan government tops plans for a coal power plant.            #SABCNews           pic.twitter.com/nEStraE0TK
 - Sarah Kimani (@sarahkimani) September 20, 2019
Our planet is in trouble. That's why we in Nairobi are all coming together to defend it against the #ClimateEmergency. Stand in solidarity with us by sharing this with your friends and family.            #ClimateStrike           #ClimateStrikeKE           pic.twitter.com/fqrcPSNJ8h
 - Greenpeace Africa (@Greenpeaceafric) September 20, 2019
???? "I had a heart-to-heart with our Mother (Nature) and she said to me, son, you need me more than I need you." Activists rally in Nairobi, Kenya as the #GlobalClimateStrike makes its way to Africa            #CoveringClimateNow           #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/V7zsow5bWi
 - Bloomberg TicToc (@tictoc) September 20, 2019
Updated at 9.22am BST
9.04am BST
What is happening in Italy?
Events in Italy will be held throughout the coming week, culminating with demonstrations in more than 100 cities on Friday 27 September. 
"Italian schools only went back last week and we needed some time to plan and mobilise, so we voted to hold the major demonstrations on the 27th," said David Wicker, a representative of the Turin branch of Fridays for Future Italia.
More than 470,000 people took part in the first global climate strike in Italy on 15 March and a similar number is expected to join next week's demonstrations. Though Italy's greenhouse gas emissions have been decreasing over the past decade, the country was criticised this year by the European Climate Foundation for failing to provide an adequate plan to further reduce emissions and dependency on fossil fuels.
Activists are hoping Italy's new left-leaning coalition will take concrete action and fulfil its pledge of making environmental issues a priority.
"They need to entirely cut the subsidies and investments going to the fossil fuel industry," said Wicker, aged 14. "And we need to start immediate investment in green energy to help society have an ecological transition."
Young activists for Fridays for Future in Turin, one of the most polluted cities in Europe, have been holding the local authority to account over its environmental policies.
"The town hall gives us feedback every two months and we give this information to scientists, who will say whether anything is really being done or not," said Wicker.
Updated at 9.07am BST
8.58am BST
A view from France: 'Smashing the status quo requires the involvement of everyone'
Emmanuel Macron's government has set the object of making France carbon-neutral by 2050. However, greenhouse gas emissions have risen in the country since 2015, and in 2017 were said to be 7% above official targets. Climate change activists say Macron has gone back on promises.
Sceptics doubt claims the government would renovate 500,000 buildings a year to use less energy and are angry at what is seen as bowing to the powerful agriculture lobby over pesticides.
Meanwhile, it is the mainstream centre-right that has proven most resistant to Greta Thunberg's appeals. The announcement that the Swedish teenager was to address the French assemblée nationale in July provoked outbursts of indignation and insults from opposition MPs. 
"Don't expect me to be applauding a prophet in short trousers," tweeted one. Others appealed for a boycott of her address. Le Monde pointed out French climate change sceptics were no longer attacking the message but the messenger and pointed to a "smear campaign" against Thunberg.
After a slow start - an action that involved only 150 protesters in February in Nantes, reports suggest 56 organisations, ecology associations and social rights groups in France plan to demonstrate on Friday and Saturday. 
Youth for Climate France has organised a number of marches across France, and youngsters cave called on adults to join their action. They urged citizens: "Strike for the climate, which means above all leave your home, your office, your farm or your factory. Smashing the status quo requires the involvement of everyone: sportsmen and women, actors, teachers, food industry workers, psychologists, delivery people, it doesn't matter. Whatever our position, we can all bring our stone to the building by refusing to accept the status quo."
In Paris, a march will begin at Place de la Nation and finish with a gathering at Parc de Bercy with workshops, conferences and "citizens' meetings". Several French unions including the powerful CFDT and CGT have issued calls for joint mobilisation. The action group Libérons le Louvre (Liberate the Louvre) is planning an action at the museum in protest at its long-standing partnership with the petrol group Total.
Last year, black-clad members of the ecology association 350.org lay down in one of the Louvre's galleries in protest at Total's financial support of the museum, which dates back more than 20 years and which Louvre officials say has funded "exhibitions, renovations, educational and cultural activities and social actions".
Among the specific demands of French climate activists is that the French national education system introduces the teaching of the "environmental situation" and that France and the European Union officially declare a state of "climate, environmental and social" emergency.
In France, a second day of protests on Saturday is planned to mark World CleanUp Day.
Updated at 9.05am BST
8.51am BST
A government minister said he cannot endorse children leaving school to take part in the climate strikes. Minister for business, energy and clean growth Kwasi Kwarteng told BBC Breakfast on Friday that he supported the "energy and creativity" of students but said time spent in school was "incredibly important". 
When asked if the government was listening to the young protesters, he said: "Their voices are being heard... What I do support is their energy, their creativity, and the fact that they have completely mastered these issues and take them very seriously. "I am not going to endorse people leaving school because I think education, time spent in school is incredibly important."
8.49am BST
Here are the final exclusive Twitter figures for the climate strike in Australia.
This has been your day on #climatestrike, Australia! No1 trending in Australia for 8hrs, and current top 7 trends all related to            @strikeclimate : 1.            #ClimateStrike2.            #schoolstrike4climate3.            #ClimateAction4.            #FridaysForFuture5. Treasury Gardens 6. Hobart 7.            #notbusinessasusual
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
And this is what the school strike conversation has looked like on Twitter in the past three days leading up to today's demonstrations:
Australia & Pacific are done, now the world picks up the #GlobalClimateStrike light. This is what the            #schoolstrike4climate conversation has looked like on Twitter in the past 3 days leading up to the            #ClimateStrike ! Global live coverage continues here:            https://t.co/rViiPMOgWR           pic.twitter.com/svzvhdsQNM
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
8.42am BST
There is a lot planned for South Africa today, with demonstrations in Johannesburg, the commercial capital, on the south-eastern coast in Durban, in Pretoria, and in Cape Town, where there'll be a march on parliament. Ayakha Melithafa, 17, said she would be joining the global strike in Cape Town.The march won't start until early afternoon to allow students to finish most of the school day. "We'll be marching to parliament to demand that the government take this issue seriously. It needs to declare a climate emergency here in South Africa, and a moratorium on coal, gas and oil mining licences. They have just ignored the problem so far," Melithafa said. South Africa is one of the continent's most developed economies and relies heavily on coal powered energy generation. It is building new and very big coal-fired power stations. "We have arranged with our teachers to leave early. it is up to us. We are the leaders of today. We don't just want the system to change. We want a brand new system which will help us live sustainably with a bright new future," Melithafa said. 
Updated at 9.12am BST
8.38am BST
A roundup of what is happening around Europe on Friday:
France
Youth for Climate France has organised a number of marches across the country, and youngsters cave called on adults to join their action. In Paris, a march will begin at Place de la Nation and finish with a gathering at Parc de Bercy with workshops, conferences and "citizens' meetings". A second day of protests on Saturday are planned to mark            World CleanUp Day.
Italy
More than 470,000 people took part in the first global climate strike in Italy on 15 March and a similar number is expected to join next Friday's demonstrations.
Germany
Nearly 500 climate change demonstrations are planned across Germany on Friday. In Berlin, several demonstrations will take place throughout the day. The Fridays for Future gathering starts at noon at the Brandenburg Gate under the motto: "Everyone for the climate." Organisers expect 10,000 people.
Updated at 8.55am BST
8.28am BST
Why is this week important?
The strikes take place ahead of the UN general assembly and the climate action summit on 23 September. The summit will bring together governments, the private sector, civil society, local authorities and other international organisations to develop ambitious solutions.
The world's leaders will converge on New York for the assembly, where each is given an (unenforced) time limit of 15 minutes to speak in front of the green marble podium. Leaders occupy positions in the hall in alphabetical order by country name, usually with a different nation occupying the first seat each year.
General assembly week usually makes news in the first day or two, when the US president and other powerful heads of state tend to have their moment, and then attention tends to tail off. For that reason, there is always some horse trading before the general assembly week, with prime ministers from big countries trying to swap speaking slots with presidents of small countries.
Updated at 8.40am BST
8.19am BST
Are you taking part in a climate strike or marking the day in any way? If so, we'd like to hear from you. Tell us what you're doing and where and share any photos and videos via our reader call out here. If you prefer you can also share via WhatsApp by adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian will see your responses and we will include some of your stories in our ongoing coverage. 
8.12am BST
Activists on bicycles block traffic at Ernst-Reuter-Platz square in Berlin, Germany, as they take part in the global climate strike today.
Updated at 8.17am BST
8.06am BST
There will be a "special takeover" of Channel 4's usual evening weather report today, as the network joins the world's largest climate strike. The channel's social media accounts will also join the walkout, bosses said, and will be going on strike between 9.30am and 5.30pm. 
Additionally, continuity announcers will share facts drawn from World Meteorological Organisation research throughout the day on Channel 4. No details were given on the nature of the weather forecast's "special takeover". Across Britain, thousands will take part in a march. Worldwide, campaigners say there are more than 3,400 events planned in 120 countries, with numbers taking part expected to surpass the estimated 1.6 million people who took part in the global strike in March. 
Updated at 8.19am BST
8.01am BST
The outdoor apparel brand Patagonia is closing every store worldwide to encourage employees and customers to join the climate strike.
Demonstrators from more than 150 countries are expected to put pressure on governments and decision-makers to do more about climate issues.
The strikes come ahead of the United Nations climate change summit, which begins on 23 September.
While in the UK and many other countries the strike is taking place today, in some countries such as Italy and the Netherlands the strike is happening next Friday, 27 September. 
Explaining the decision to close stores, Ryan Gellert, the general manager, EMEA, Patagonia, said: "The climate crisis is a human issue - affecting all of us... As a global business, we will be closing our stores on 20 and 27 September, striking with the youth activists and calling for governments around the world to take action."
Updated at 8.23am BST
7.52am BST
The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, will today thank young people for educating the world about the climate crisis. Speaking at the youth climate strike, Corbyn will also criticise the prime minister, Boris Johnson, for calling global warming a "primitive fear".
He is expected to say:
To the young people leading by example today here and across the world, I want to say thank you: thank you for educating us about the climate crisis and the emergency of species extinction and biodiversity loss.
I know the situation can look bleak. We have a prime minister that has called global warming a 'primitive fear without foundation'. The US president is a full-blown climate denier, putting our planet in danger by pulling out of the Paris climate agreement. And the Amazon is on fire, looted by big corporations with a Brazilian president watching on who doesn't care.
But when we see young people demanding urgent action, it's an inspiration. When I see this movement growing - and it's growing every day - I know we can tackle the climate emergency.
The next Labour government will welcome your pressure and hear your demands for change. We will kick-start a green Industrial revolution and protect our planet, so it's there to give life and joy to generations to come." 
Updated at 8.30am BST
7.48am BST
I will be picking up the live blog from the Guardian's London offices. Please share any photographs or comments from where you are with me: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com
Updated at 7.48am BST
7.42am BST
I'll be handing over the blog now to my colleague Sarah Marsh.  There are still hundreds of places, thousands of students and hours of protest to come. 
Stay with us as the strikes sweep across Asia, Africa and Europe, and into the Americas. There will also be plenty more Australian news and analysis to come.
To recap what we've seen across Asia and the Pacific today:
    • At least 300,000 people have taken part in the largest climate strike across Australia yet.
    • Melbourne's event drew 100-150,000 people, and Sydney's 80-100,000. Hobart's 22,000 attendees made it Tasmania's biggest ever strike action.
    • Hundreds of regional centres joined in - from Alice Springs, Byron Bay and Katherine.
    • As part of Guardian Australia's coverage, the federal energy minister, the opposition energy spokesman and two of the country's biggest energy companies took questions from students.
    • In Vanuatu, the deputy prime minister spoke directly to the US, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as countries "to blame for this threat to our survival".
    • Protests also unfolded in the Solomon Islands, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan, India, Pakistan and more.
22000 people in Hobart, Tasmania... And this is Sydney still gathering!!! #ClimateStrike           #FridaysForFuture           https://t.co/wt5YPuGRL7
 - Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) September 20, 2019
Updated at 7.50am BST
7.36am BST
As our Australian coverage wraps up, here's a great round-table discussion from some Brisbane students.
"That was insane!": Post- #climatestrike debrief with Lestyn Harries (13), Owynn Harries (11), Haemish Lander-McBride (13), Oscar Lander-McBride (10) Zachary Brown (13) and Jackson Warren (13).            pic.twitter.com/X3ehllv0bu
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Updated at 8.22am BST
7.27am BST
This from the headmaster of Sydney's Newington College, on why he allowed his students to attend #ClimateStrike           #FridaysForFuture           pic.twitter.com/R2JiXuTvsr
 - Amy Coopes (@coopesdetat) September 20, 2019
We have 3 demands: 1. No new coal, oil and gas projects, including the Adani mine. 2. 100% renewable energy generation, and exports by 2030 3. Fund a just transition and job creation for all fossil-fuel workers and communities #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/4DUCqbjudt
 - School Strike 4 Climate (@StrikeClimate) September 20, 2019
7.21am BST
They've finally started marching in Melbourne. And here's our video wrap of the thousands on the streets today.
Updated at 7.32am BST
7.16am BST
More from Lisa Cox in Melbourne
Edie Shepherd, a Wiradjuri and Noongar woman, spoke to the crowd earlier. She said she'd recently visited communities in the Lake Woods region in the NT, an area that gas companies are proposing to frack. 
"While Lake Woods usually flows with water, this time it ran dry," she said. As well as students, unions are here today. Sam Davis is a member of the National Union of Workers and was here with his young family. "We want to show that climate justice is very important to workers as well. A lot of our workers are going to be impacted by climate change in the near future too," he says. "The values we have as unionists are why I've brought my kids." 
Updated at 7.19am BST
7.12am BST
They've started in Mumbai: 
#GlobalClimateStrike has started.. children demanding for            #ClimateEmergency.. 'we want more trees!'            #ActNow for their future! Join us take            #ClimateAction           @GretaThunberg           @MumbaiMirror           @350           @FFFIndia           pic.twitter.com/3lmzPUNoFA
 - Fridays for future_Mumbai ???? (@fffmumbai1) September 20, 2019
In Pakistan: 
The first of 3 climate protests planned for #Mardan has started!            #ClimateMarchPakistan           pic.twitter.com/sldhirCAbA
 - Climate Action Now! ? Pakistan (@ClimateActionPk) September 20, 2019
While in Melbourne, the crowd is so big it's going to take a few more hours:
The #Melbourne Naarm crowd so massive at            #ClimateStrike we march back to the start and half the crowd hasn't even left!            pic.twitter.com/yiZLNDgOY9
 - School Strike 4 Climate (@StrikeClimate) September 20, 2019
7.09am BST
If you're waking up in Europe and the UK, then here is where you can find a protest near you :
Related: Global climate strike: how you can get involved
7.05am BST
And here's First Dog's last cartoon for today: 
First Dog on the MoonPhotograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the Moon
7.01am BST
Organisers claim 300,000 climate protesters in Australia
The organisers of the School Strike For Climate have estimated more than 300,000 people took to the streets across Australia today.
More than double the number of Australians who rallied at climate strikes in March came out today, with an estimated 100,000 in Melbourne, 80,000 in Sydney, 30,000 in Brisbane, 20,000 in Hobart, 15,000 in Canberra, 10,000 in Perth and 10,000 in Adelaide, not to mention the other more than 100 events in non-capital cities and towns.
Organisations striking included 33 Australian unions, 2,500 businesses  including Atlassian, Canva, Domain and Intrepid, and  faith institutions including the Anglican Church & Uniting Church, they said.
More than 30,000 people rallied in Brisbane.Photograph: Glenn Hunt/Getty ImagesAn estimated 80,000 people pack the Domain in Sydney for the climate strike, Australia.Photograph: Jessica Hromas/The Guardian
Updated at 7.22am BST
6.50am BST
There are well over 100,000 people here in Melbourne and organisers are talking about 150,000. 
Niamh, 17, from Castlemaine told the crowd: "I fight for climate justice because everyone deserves a safe future. The government is not supporting it yet, but together we will change that."
Freya, 16, from Melbourne said: "The climate crisis is a human and global issue, and we need to act now."
The students spoke about recent natural disasters around the world, including massive wildfires in the Amazon and the early bushfires that have caused devastation in Queensland and NSW. "This is predicted to get a lot worse if we don't act now," Niamh said. 
The students then spoke about the demands of young people striking today, which include the complete phase-out of fossil fuels. The students have gone to great lengths to talk about the need to secure the futures of workers in fossil fuel-intensive industries, whose livelihoods will be affected as economies become carbon-neutral. 
Freya said: "We understand the role fossil fuels have played in putting food on the table for families. It's vital we all work together, not against one another. It's not about jobs v the environment."
Everyone looks so nice in the sunshine #climatestrike           pic.twitter.com/zr7XNjggKr
 - Luke Henriques-Gomes (@lukehgomes) September 20, 2019
Melbourne's poster game is strong #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/YcNw5HkejQ
 - Jordan Fennell (@jordaaaye) September 20, 2019
Updated at 7.19am BST
6.27am BST
Tens if not hundreds of thousands packed out Sydney's Domain park in the CBD. 
Moemoana, 18, has come from Wollongong to the protest, and her homeland is Samoa. She's here with members of the Matavai Pacific cultural centre. 
"I've come to fight for the Pacific. The Pacific Islands are [only] metres above sea level because of climate change and it's a scary future for our islands. We want to urge people to take some action.
"Seas are rising [in] Pacific Islands, especially Tuvalu and Kiribati, it's a real threat, and Australia needs to know that Pacifika are neighbours and Australia really needs to help out. 
18-year-old Moemoana, (centre) has come from Wollongong to the protest, and her homeland is Samoa. "It's a real threat and Australia needs to know that Pacifika are neighbours and Australia really needs to help out." #climatestrike           pic.twitter.com/67bvwsdnuU
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 20, 2019
17-year-old protest organiser Daisy spoke of the third demand of the campaign: funding a just transition and job creation for all fossil-fuel workers and communities.
"We need solutions that care for people and our planet," she said.
"Climate justice is not about jobs versus the environment. Just as climate change hurts people, unemployment hurts people."
She said too many people were already suffering and would suffer if governments did not find solutions.
"If our government cares about all of us then they need to get on with the job of stopping any new coal, oil and gas projects, powering Australia with 100% renewable energy by no later than 2030, and doing all this while funding just transition and jobs for all fossil fuel workers and their communities so that no one is left behind."
Marlie Thomas, a Kamilaroi teenager from Gunnedah, said she was attending the rally on the authority of her elders, not the Department of Education.
"I've had to help collect bottled water for our family in Walgett," she said.
Former federal MP and City of Sydney councillor Kerryn Phelps told Guardian Australia cities "need to play their part when it comes planning for the future and mitigating climate change". 
"That includes our own operations, working with businesses and residents, providing incentives to people to reduce their carbon footprint, to encourage active public transport, to encourage renewable sources of energy.
"And because of the sheer size of the population, not only do they contribute so much to climate change risk but they also have the most, I think, to offer. Obviously we've got the agriculture sector, which needs to play its part, the transport sector, but individuals also can do so much themselves." 
Updated at 6.34am BST
6.14am BST
So far
With the Australian strikes not even half over in many places, here's what has happened so far:
    • Hundreds of thousands have participated in the largest climate strike across Australia yet: more than 100 locations, from capital cities to regional centres such as Alice Springs, Byron Bay and Katherine.
    • In Sydney and Melbourne crowds were estimated at 80,000 to 150,000 respectively, making them the biggest demonstrations since the Iraq war. In Tasmania 22,000 marchers made it the biggest strike action the state had ever seen.
    • As part of Guardian Australia's coverage, the federal energy minister, the opposition energy spokesman and two of the country's biggest energy companies took questions from students.
    • In Vanuatu, the deputy prime minister spoke directly to the US, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as countries "to blame for this threat to our survival".
    • Protests in the Solomon Islands, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong and many more also continued throughout the day.
Updated at 6.22am BST
6.04am BST
They're marching in the Philippines, too.
HAPPENING NOW: March to J. Diokno Park, CHR, UP Diliman Complex pic.twitter.com/dqr1imYJcY
 - Youth Strike 4 Climate Philippines ?? (@youthlclimatePH) September 20, 2019
We have reached the Commission on Human Rights! Join us here. #ClimateStrike           #ClimateStrikePH           #ParaSaKlimabukasan           pic.twitter.com/EkygPYxBd2
 - Youth Strike 4 Climate Philippines ?? (@youthlclimatePH) September 20, 2019
Updated at 6.10am BST
5.59am BST
A First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.Photograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the Moon
Updated at 6.01am BST
5.56am BST
Amazing #CoffsHarbour           #ClimateStrike over 1400 people TRIPLE the March 15            #Schoolstrike4climate huge energy marching on Gumbaynggirr land for our kids future            #ClimateJustice           pic.twitter.com/Ffj17LgrGB
 - Liisa Rusanen (@liisa_sr) September 20, 2019
5.52am BST
Justin McCurry  in Japan writes:
Japan has suffered unseasonable, powerful and fatal storms in recent years that have also inflicted serious damage on its infrastructure. Last week's typhoon was unusually strong, leaving hundreds of thousands of people without power. The country has also been hit by record-breaking heatwaves - one last summer killed 65 people in a single week.
Japan's government had planned to expand nuclear power in an effort to tackle carbon dioxide emissions, but the Fukushima disaster changed all that. Pressure is building to invest more in renewables as the government expands coal-fired power stations and imports of gas and oil to fill the energy gap left by the post-Fukushima closure of dozens of nuclear reactors.
Japan's involvement in the climate strike has been low key. This Friday adults and children belonging to the Fridays for Future Tokyo movement will gather outside the United Nations University in central Tokyo at 5pm, make speeches and then march through the streets of the capital. Just over 100 people turned up in March; students at Japanese state schools were noticeably absent and I think that will be the case this Friday.
Updated at 5.54am BST
5.51am BST
A few protests have begun in Japan, and one is scheduled for Tokyo at 5pm local time.
It's Friday morning in Japan. Climate strike in Hiroshima just started! Please follow us! @gretathunberg           #fridayforfuture           #climatestrike           #globalstrikeforfuture           #fridayforfuture           #Hiroshima           #prayformotherearth           #strikewithus           #?????           #????????           pic.twitter.com/nvMoL0bEeT
 - ????????? (@earthgypsy424) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.52am BST
5.48am BST
I cannot stress enough that my favourite thing from today is students on the ground interviewing their fellow strikers.
Here is Oscar Lander-McBride, 10, interviewing Zac, 13.
Oscar interviews Zac who is losing his voice after leading the crowds in chants at the Brisbane #ClimateStrike. "It's so great, chanting with all the other people for what we think is right".            pic.twitter.com/79pa58MUPH
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
And from earlier, Esther Plummer, 13, interviewing Jasper, 15.
Esther Plummer (13 years old) interviews fellow climate strikerJasper (15 years old) about why he is attending the #ClimateStrike in Byron Bay.            pic.twitter.com/YTrFpOJrC3
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.58am BST
5.43am BST
There are more than 100,000 people in Melbourne, according to organisers.
Melbourne 2:30pm #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/Av7WW09Yxj
 - Erin Dolan (@erin_dolan) September 20, 2019
5.34am BST
Ahead of today's #ClimateStrike, The Guardian asked some primary school kids what they think climate change is.            pic.twitter.com/IY2QuwVVAb
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 19, 2019
Video of the crowds at the Brisbane #ClimateStrike thanks to our reporter on the ground            @BenSmee           pic.twitter.com/ciVfFF6GWV
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
5.30am BST
An aerial view of Melbourne, only 30 minutes in.
#climatestrike just starting to build in            #Melbourne, I'm sure we will see this build and build over the next hour.            pic.twitter.com/lcjACJKRke
 - Stephen Torsi (@STorsi) September 20, 2019
And here's the march crossing Brisbane's Victoria bridge:
Here they come. #ClimateStrike protesters making their way over the Victoria Bridge in Brisbane            @abcnews           @abcbrisbane           pic.twitter.com/niGut3inN3
 - Jessica van Vonderen (@jessvanvonderen) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.33am BST
5.28am BST
In Bali:
Marching for the climate in Bali.Photograph: Sonny Tumbelaka/AFP/Getty Images
In Singapore: 
It's a climate emergency! A shop in Singapore closes for the march.Photograph: Mladen Antonov/AFP/Getty Images
Updated at 5.35am BST
5.20am BST
And in Brisbane who better to give a crowd estimate than Haemish Lander-McBride, 13, who has been to the past two strikes.
"It's massive in comparison to the other ones... People aren't just going to the first one - people are really coming again and again and again."
"It's not something we're gonna give up on" says 13-year-old Haemish Lander-McBride at the Brisbane #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/rsdzuew0WW
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.22am BST
5.17am BST
And big crowds in Adelaide:
This is huge #ClimateStrike           #Adelaide           pic.twitter.com/TLJWS3ZRqY
 - Jarni Blakkarly (@JarniBlakkarly) September 20, 2019
Incredible turnout in Adelaide for #ClimateStrike reminder: we've only got one shot.            pic.twitter.com/w0NBUjZW5j
 - Leon (@LeonCermak) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.18am BST
5.15am BST
An estimated 10,000 in Perth:
Absolutely incredible crowd of at least 10,000 people here in Perth for the #GlobalClimateStrikeI'm blown away!            #schoolstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/VWq6BHRaDm
 - Senator Jordon Steele-John (@Jordonsteele) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.17am BST
5.14am BST
Mike Bowers  in Canberra:
Climate strike in Glebe Park Canberra @GuardianAus           pic.twitter.com/xHrFTZUqRs
 - Mikearoo (@mpbowers) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.18am BST
5.08am BST
It's just past 2pm, which is the official start time in Melbourne. But as we saw in Sydney, crowds are so huge there are lines to get in.
This is the crowd trying to get in to Treasury Gardens in Melbourne. #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/8n2ds4lUoQ
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) September 20, 2019
It'll take a while to get into full swing.
Updated at 5.08am BST
5.00am BST
Early crowd numbers out of Sydney: 50,000 to 80,000 people at least.
Police have confirmed at least 50,000 people at the Sydney #climatestrike. May be more, considering capacity at The Domain is 80,000 and it was chockers.
- Jenny Noyes (@jennynoise) September 20, 2019
Updated at 5.02am BST
4.57am BST
More from First Dog:
A First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.Photograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the MoonA First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.Photograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the Moon
Updated at 5.03am BST
4.55am BST
Over on 2GB in Sydney and 4BC in Brisbane this morning Alan Jones was keeping a sceptical eye on the climate strike. "If you ask some of these people what it was about they wouldn't have a clue," Jones said without actually asking any of the strikers that question.
An elderly caller suggested the children's minds were being manipulated just like those of the Hitler Youth in Germany decades ago.
Warming to the theme, Jones had a Goebbels quote on hand: "I will remind our listeners that his minister of propaganda ,Joseph Goebbels, also said it would not be impossible to prove with sufficient repetition and the psychological understanding of the people concerned that a square is in fact a circle. They are mere words and words can be moulded until they clothe ideas in disguise. This is what's going on here isn't it? Immensely disturbing I have to say. Immensely disturbing."
Updated at 5.14am BST
4.49am BST
Former Queensland Greens senator Andrew Bartlett has this estimate:
Ive been to 100s of rallies over the years. I'm certain today's #Strike4Climate is easily the biggest protest in            #Brisbane since the main rally against the Iraq war in 2003.            https://t.co/Y6pDJBsDb0
 - Andrew Bartlett (@AndrewBartlett) September 20, 2019
Similar thoughts in Sydney:
Hard to estimate numbers from where I am, but definitely looks like the biggest one in Sydney since the stop the war one in 2003
- Ben Cubby (@bencubby) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.59am BST
4.49am BST
The Brisbane rally keeps growing. People are still streaming in 30 minutes after the posted start time and police have had to shut roads on two sides of Queens Park. Hard to guess at a crowd figure, but comfortably over 10,000 at this point.
This is not, of course, an anti-government rally, but there's certainly no love for the coal embrace of the Queensland government. And notably, there are at least a half dozen left-wing unions here. The Electrical Trades Union has just taken a swipe, officials complaining the government has let the private sector do the heavy lifting on renewables, and giving a strong endorsement of climate action. 
4.43am BST
Pacific climate warriors: "I have a right to set foot on my islands... to see its beauty and everything it has to give. My generation and generations to come have a right to stand on the same soil our ancestors did." #ClimateStrike           #sydney           pic.twitter.com/b6asT8WDL1
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 20, 2019
4.36am BST
Rebecca Ratcliffe in Delhi writes:
Students protesters in India have a long list of demands for their political leaders. The air in many of its cities is infamously toxic, poor waste management is putting lives at risk and water shortages have reached crisis levels.
Last year India was ranked among the bottom five countries on the environmental performance index produced by Yale and Columbia universities and the World Economic Forum.
"We are in September now and we would be usually subjected to monsoon rains at this time but the rainfall is so erratic," said Jacintha Thota, 14, who lives in Hyderabad. 
On Friday 200 students from her school and some of their teachers are expected to march together. Hyderabad is one of tens of locations, including Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru, where protests are expected to take place. 
The Fridays for Future movement is much smaller than other more established environmental campaigns in India, but students say it is growing in popularity, thanks partly to social media.
In Delhi protesters are planning seven days of action, which includes marching to the ministry of urban affairs and housing on Friday. On Sunday protesters will meet at Bhalswa landfill, the second biggest dump yard in the city, while next week they will protest at other key political buildings.
Bhavreen Kandhari, an environmental activist from Fridays For Future India will take part. "We have beautiful laws on the paper but none of it is being executed," she said. 
Five years ago, when her daughters had an X-ray, she discovered the impact of Delhi's pollution. "Their lungs were black in colour; they should be pink. For a child who is born and brought up in Delhi for 10 years this is the damage that they suffer," she said. Her twin daughters, 15, will also be attending the march in Delhi.
"The rich think 'Oh I'll put a mask on my child', 'I'll get an air purifier', and the poorest they can barely make two meals [a day]."
Updated at 4.45am BST
4.34am BST
Big turnout in Thailand - and a reminder that many of the protests in Asia will be kicking into gear soon as well.
We are walking to the Ministry of Resources and Environment to demand a safe climate ???? #FridaysForFuture           #ClimateStrikeThailand           #ClimateStrike           #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/WzHUuEOESm
 - Greenpeace Thailand ?? (@greenpeaceth) September 20, 2019
4.32am BST
Wait no, maybe this one:
The Melbourne #ClimateStrike starts in Treasury Gardens soon. Fatima, 19: "Whatever we do in the next few months will decide what the future is going to look like. "We can put our all in to switch to renewables and go down a greener path, or it's going to be bad for everyone."            pic.twitter.com/Jhl4W6qD4
 - Lisa Cox (@_LisaMCox) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.45am BST
4.29am BST
Calling the winner now 
Some @lizzo vibes at Sydney climate strike.            #schoolstrike4climate           #sydney           #sign           pic.twitter.com/iHmoEbCedp
 - Dan Ilic (@danilic) September 20, 2019
4.26am BST
Meanwhile the Brisbane protest has broken its banks and people are streaming down the streets.
Queens Park can no longer hold the Brisbane #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/FI4hzxSuuw
 - Ben Smee (@BenSmee) September 20, 2019
Brisbane #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/AZdRaJkvZj
 - Drew Pavlou (@DrewPavlou) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.27am BST
4.25am BST
There's already a crowd at Treasury Gardens for the Melbourne school strike which kicks off at 2pm. Thea Hamilton, 16, is one of the organisers. 
"I'm really excited and hopefully we'll be able to get some really good action out of this and get more people involved in climate action and climate justice," she says. 
She says young people "are looking for a space to be heard and to really feel represented by this global movement so we can call for climate action at the UN global climate summit on the 23rd". 
Updated at 4.28am BST
4.20am BST
Q&A from EnergyAustralia
Continuing our series. EnergyAustralia has agreed to take a question from a climate striker. Along with Queensland's Stanwell Corporation, it is the other one of Australia's top 10 carbon emitters to agree to take a question.
Josh O'Callaghan, 15, from Adelaide asks:
What are the future initiatives that your company plans to put in place to have 100% renewable energy production?
Mark Collette, the head of EnergyAustralia's customer business: 
Thanks Josh. Designing and building a 100% renewable energy system is a huge challenge for Australia. I think Australians are up for the challenge. Your home state of South Australia has solar and wind already providing over half of the electricity supplied to South Australians. 
In planning for 100% renewables, the first 50% is easier than the second 50%. Solar and wind generation follow the sun and the wind, so when it is not sunny and windy we can't produce power for customers.
I reckon that above about 50% renewables for Australia we need to find ways to move the power from the sun and the wind to dark and still times, or use it immediately.
One way we do this is storage. Already we have two of the largest batteries in the country in Victoria, and we are working on two large pumped hydro projects - one of which is in your state of South Australia.
Another way we are exploring is helping customers use power when it is available from the sun and the wind. We can time pool pumps and hot water systems to run just through these times.
There's a long way to go but we like tackling tough problems, like the second 50%."
Updated at 4.30am BST
4.12am BST
In Sydney Daisy, 17, tells the crowd their frustration has never been about people working in the fossil-fuel industry. Their demand is "about acting to halt this crisis while creating safe and meaningful work for all of us".
INCREDIBLE pic.twitter.com/BBFoYUd76o
 - kymtje (@kymtje) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.14am BST
4.11am BST
And let's not forget the regions. 
More photos from Lismore from Frewoini Baume: 
They're showing their passion in Lismore.Photograph: Freiwoni BaumeMarchers out in force in Lismore.Photograph: Freiwoni Baume
And these beautiful pictures from Katherine in the NT:
The crowds gather in Katherine.Photograph: Charlotte Pickering, Tom Browell and Alena GoldbachWalking the walk and talking the talk in Katherine.Photograph: Charlotte Pickering, Tom Browell and Alena GoldbachTaking advantage of some shade in Katherine.Photograph: Charlotte Pickering, Tom Browell and Alena GoldbachStudents march for the climate in Katherine.Photograph: Charlotte Pickering, Tom Browell and Alena Goldbach
And here's Albury:
Good turn out for #ClimateStrike in            #Albury           pic.twitter.com/lEhazJ4Ofw
 - Dr Juliette Milbank (@juliettemilbank) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.18am BST
4.04am BST
The crowd in Sydney is getting so big you can really only see it from the air.
From a different angle. pic.twitter.com/onk7kVfqyH
 - Jonathan Pryke (@jonathan_pryke) September 20, 2019
Perth and Canberra aren't too shabby either:
Perth climate strike #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/aZO7SmBaZn
 - Paul Castle (@SleeperPService) September 20, 2019
Amazing to join colleagues and friends at #schoolstrike4climate in            #Canberra today - proud of a community standing for a safe climate future            @EnergyEstate           pic.twitter.com/bHd4PIvj3i
 - Simon Corbell (@SimonCorbell) September 20, 2019
Updated at 4.06am BST
4.03am BST
The biggest strike Tasmania has ever seen
This is the third nationwide climate strike in Australia - after November 2018 and March 2019. They get bigger every time.
Organisers say there are some 22,000 people at Hobart's global climate rally - they say this is the biggest strike action Tasmania has ever seen @abchobart           pic.twitter.com/CUGpg85V46
 - Phoebe Hosier (@HosierPhoebe) September 20, 2019
Amelia Neylon,  16, is on the ground and tells Guardian Australia: 
The crowd is reportedly over 22,000. Bob Brown at this count has said it is larger then the Franklin River rally. Making this the largest rally in Tasmania held to date.
Updated at 4.38am BST
3.58am BST
It's all happening. 
Brisbane. #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/KrJzLNtzfA
 - Ben Smee (@BenSmee) September 20, 2019
Lots of babies at this protest. They don't even have jobs! #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/q3J3MwFYPz
 - Alex Lee (@alex_c_lee) September 20, 2019
Big turnout at Gosford #ClimateStrike (pic via my dad)            pic.twitter.com/06ekkdErkR
 - Nick Evershed (@NickEvershed) September 20, 2019
The largest street protest in Hobart since the FRANKLIN River - 22,000 people demanding Climate Action Now #politas           #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/xqjSlwN7Ci
 - Rosalie Woodruff ?? (@rosaliewoodruff) September 20, 2019
3.53am BST
Another must-watch, exclusive to Guardian Australia:
Harriet O'Shea Carre is one of the original school strikers from Castlemaine. She is in New York for the UN Climate Summit. Harriet is also seeking a meeting with @AIGinsurance  to voice her concern over their involvement with the Adani coal mine.            #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/VSnPKCcwKs
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Meanwhile Australia's strikes are making waves around the world:
Incredible pictures as Australia's gathering for the #climatestrikeThis is the huge crowd building up in Sydney. Australia is setting the standard! Its bedtime in New York...so please share as many pictures as you can as the strikes move across Asia to Europe and Africa!            pic.twitter.com/7eAPUQPq5C
 - Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.57am BST
3.51am BST
If you are Gen X or above, then you can laugh at the latest from First Dog on the Moon instead*:
"Sponsored post" for the climate strikes.Photograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the Moon
*This is a joke - First Dog is funny for all ages.
Updated at 3.58am BST
3.43am BST
I'm a millennial / Gen Z so I understand these signs. If you don't, rest assured they are very funny. 
pic.twitter.com/adDN1uioJb
- Dr Internet Man (@ed_jenko) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.48am BST
3.41am BST
In Brisbane, here's Parker with his message to the government - and a great poem.
How cool is Parker #climatestrike           pic.twitter.com/1OqOAOMqTs
 - Ben Smee (@BenSmee) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.49am BST
3.38am BST
The award for best sign is getting more competitive every minute. Here is Matilda (3).
Three-year-old Matilda at the climate strike in Sydney with a Wiggles sign.Photograph: supplied
Updated at 3.50am BST
3.35am BST
Sydney's strikes have started but aren't even at full swing, Melbourne's starts in 1.5 hours, and preparations have begun in Perth. 
Earlier today we saw huge turnouts in regional areas, including Alice Springs and Byron Bay. 
Protesters have already started gathering in #Perth for today's            #ClimateStrike !!!            pic.twitter.com/8bOlPSI31B
 - School Strike 4 Climate (@StrikeClimate) September 20, 2019
3.29am BST
Q&A from the energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor
Angus Taylor has also agreed to take a question. 
From  Josh O'Callaghan, 15, from Adelaide:
It is said that 'if those who believe in climate change are wrong, we will have needlessly created a cleaner world, but if those who don't believe in climate change are wrong, we will die'. Do you agree? If so, how should we act on this? 
Angus Taylor : 
The federal government is taking strong action to reduce global emissions and respond to the serious challenge of climate change.
The government's $3.5bn climate solutions package sets out how we will meet our 2030 Paris target, down to the last tonne.
People are free to have their views, but my personal opinion is that students should be at school during school hours."
Updated at 3.32am BST
3.25am BST
Reporter Helen Davidson  is on the ground in Sydney: 
Clover Moore on the way to the Sydney #climatestrike "it's so inspiring to see so many people heading towards the domain."            pic.twitter.com/LVifb0FG0z
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 20, 2019
Rose from Glenmore Rd Paddington public school #climatestrike "the government has to stop doing nothing about climate change"            pic.twitter.com/DeJctJAjd1
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 20, 2019
3.23am BST
Our first dispatches from Amelia Neylon in Hobart: 
Photos and great signs from the Hobart #climatestrike from Amelia Neylon (16)            pic.twitter.com/l4Q2c5DMmC
 - Naaman Zhou (@naamanzhou) September 20, 2019
Meanwhile crowds build in Sydney. There is a LONG line to get in.
My son is in the Domain for the #ClimateStrike today. Here's his first video            pic.twitter.com/PhEPD61lG2
 - Svetlana Stankovic (@SvetlaStankovic) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.26am BST
3.17am BST
Esther in Byron Bay has interviewed her fellow strikers. Must-watch.
Esther Plummer (13 years old) interviews fellow climate strikerJasper (15 years old) about why he is attending the #ClimateStrike in Byron Bay.            pic.twitter.com/YTrFpOJrC3
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.27am BST
3.11am BST
First images in from Hobart:
A huge crowd has gathered on Hobart's Parliament Lawns for the #ClimateStrike           #politas           pic.twitter.com/ySfzAD2TCR
 - Monte Bovill (@MonteBovill) September 20, 2019
1000s here in Hobart #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/L8aM36LRrR
 - Correna Haythorpe?? (@CHaythorpeAEU) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.27am BST
3.05am BST
Sydney's strike is scheduled to start at noon.
Huge crowds are still making their way to the city. This could take some time and is looking immense.
Massive crowds heading to Sydney Domain for the #climatestrike           #schoolsstrike4climate           pic.twitter.com/NoEdvBq5KU
 - Stephanie H Convery (@gingerandhoney) September 20, 2019
Massive crowds building in #Sydney           #ClimateStrike           @SBSNews           pic.twitter.com/Vhy1PI6d40
 - Abbie O'Brien (@AOBrien_news) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.08am BST
3.04am BST
Some footage from Thailand:
#FridaysForFuture           #ClimateStrikeThailand           #ClimateStrike           #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/MC7dB0wLnc
 - Greenpeace Thailand ?? (@greenpeaceth) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.05am BST
3.02am BST
Q&A from Labor's Mark Butler
Continuing our Q&A series is Labor's spokesman on climate change and energy, Mark Butler.
Frewoini Baume, 18, from Lismore asks:
Permanent destruction for temporary economic gain is not a sustainable or stable economy. Why are you supporting the coal industry when it has been scientifically proven to be unsustainable? Yes, the economy may temporarily suffer but the longer you wait the more severe the impact. So why not act now? 
Mark Butler : 
 The Labor party remains deeply committed to taking climate action to make sure that we comply with the commitments to future generations in the Paris agreement - to keep global warming way below 2 degrees and to pursue efforts around 1.5 degrees to make sure that we are at net zero emissions by the middle of the century. 
There is no denying that Australia needs to drastically reduce its carbon emissions, but after coming down by more than 10% when Labor was last in office, emissions have been rising ever since the election of Tony Abbott, and the government's own data shows they will keep rising all the way to 2030. 
Australia doesn't have a national climate policy. That is why we need to keep pressuring the Liberal government to take serious climate action."
Updated at 3.07am BST
2.54am BST
Some more charts, this time Australia-specific from our data editor, Nick Evershed:
This first shows warming in Australia, measuring how different the temperature is in a given year against the long-term average. Put simply, it demonstrates how things are getting hotter, and 2018 was the third-hottest year:
Climate interactive
This second shows Australia's quarterly emissions over time. The bars need to be under the two lines (assuming a linear rate of reduction to meet the target) if we are going to meet various emissions targets. 
Climate interactive
The pink line shows the trajectory to a 28% reduction in emissions, based on 2005 levels, by 2030. This is the more ambitious of Australia's possible reduction targets under the Paris agreement. 
The purple line is the trajectory proposed by the Climate Change Authority based on the best available science to ensure Australia makes a meaningful contribution towards keeping global temperature increases under 2C. 
Ideally the bars should be below both lines.
Updated at 3.00am BST
2.45am BST
And some early data from Twitter:
    • #ClimateStrike is trending #1 in Australia and has been for the past two hours
    • #schoolstrike4climate is at #2 and #friday4future is at #5
Australian cities where #climatestrike is trending: 
    • Adelaide #2
    • Darwin #1
    • Melbourne #1
    • Perth #1
    • Sydney #1
#EXCLUSIVE : The first            #climatestrike data is in! This is how the school strike conversation has lit up across Australia over the the last 3 days to now. Follow our            #schoolstrike4climate live blog here:            https://t.co/rViiPMOgWRData via            @TwitterAU           #FridaysForFuture           pic.twitter.com/ljPWK4yxQN
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 20, 2019
Updated at 3.02am BST
2.44am BST
An on-the-ground sketch from First Dog on the Moon
2.38am BST
You may have noticed the arresting temperature chart at the top of our site this morning - I know I did. 
https://t.co/zq9DZhlJOt           pic.twitter.com/F7kd5Rj3UA
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 19, 2019
Our colleagues internationally have also compiled more charts that explain the climate crisis.
Related: Why are people striking? The climate crisis explained in 10 charts
Chart           Chart
And some slightly better news: 
Chart
2.31am BST
In Lismore Frewoini Baume has interviewed Suhani Sheppeard, 16.
FB: "Why are you striking?" 
SS: "I'm striking because I believe it takes one person to change the world. Having that opportunity to be that person is incredibly inspiring and I want to be the one voice to inspire others.
"It feels incredibly empowering to be a part of the community in our global strike, and inspires me to always fight for climate justice."
Updated at 2.35am BST
2.28am BST
Vanuatu's deputy prime minister: "The people who need to hear this are not here"
Jotham Napat, Vanuatu's deputy prime minister, delivered his speech in English "because the people who need to hear this, the ones who are causing the problems, are not here".
According to the Vanuatu Posts' Dan McGarry, Napat named the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as the ones who are "to blame for this threat to our survival".
Earlier Vanuatu's foreign affairs minister, Ralph Regenvanu, also spoke and criticised Australia. He characterised the discussions at the recent Pacific Islands forum in Tuvalu as a "fight" between Australia and the rest of the Pacific.
Regenvanu, an outspoken Pacific leader, has also promised to take his country's climate grievance to the International Court of Justice to seek legal redress. 
VU FM Ralph Regenvanu takes the gloves off. Describing the standoff in Tuvalu as a 'fight' with Australia, he promises to bring the nation's climate grievances to the ICJ to seek legal redress. #ClimateStrike           #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/tNk5HEHqcC
 - Dan McGarry (@dailypostdan) September 20, 2019
During the Pacific Islands forum Regenvanu told the Guardian that critical talks almost collapsed twice amid "fierce" clashes between Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, and other Pacific leaders. 
"Australia is out there - they're not with us," Regenvanu said at the time. 
Today students in Vanuatu partnered with the Vanuatu climate action network to stage a silent strike. Students wearing traditional dress and holding banners with messages about the climate crisis stood around the capital, Port Vila, as politicians walked around the city viewing the messages, finishing up at the seafront of the city where there were art exhibitions, poetry performances and speeches. 
Updated at 2.36am BST
2.18am BST
In Albury the march will head to the office of the environment minister, Sussan Ley.
Albury #ClimateStrike. Will compile on the thread below. We will be marching to            @sussanley 's office            #FridaysForFuture           pic.twitter.com/bFcKkyPlVq
 - Amy Coopes (@coopesdetat) September 20, 2019
Updated at 2.21am BST
2.16am BST
Q&A from Stanwell Corporation
Our first Q&A is in. The Stanwell Corporation is one of Australia's biggest energy companies. EnergyAustralia and Stanwell were the only members of Australia's top 10 carbon emitters who agreed to take a question for our live blog today. 
Narii Hamill-Salmon, 15, from the Gold Coast asks: 
 The Stanwell Corporation was named as the nation's third largest carbon emitter in 2017-18 [by the Clean Energy Regulator] thus making the company a significant contributor to the climate crisis.
Mr Van Breda, if you could say one thing to the future generations of this planet, the ones who are going to experience the most devastating impacts of climate change, what would you tell them?"
Richard Van Breda,  chief executive:
Thanks for your question, Narii. I think a lot about that, and here's what I would tell future generations about the work we do at Stanwell.
The electricity industry is at a tricky time in its transition to lower carbon technologies. The proportion of low carbon energy and storage in Australia is increasing quickly, but those technologies are not yet at a point where they can function without support from fossil fuel generation.
As a company that operates coal-fired power stations, it's Stanwell's job to provide the electricity that people need, as the industry moves to a lower carbon future. That change can't happen immediately and needs to be planned and done carefully.
We ramp generation from our coal-fired power stations up and down every day to support solar generation in the middle of the day, and still provide the electricity people need in the evenings. 
We are also exploring new generation and storage technology that will help reduce emissions. I'm really proud of the work Stanwell people are doing in all those areas."
Updated at 2.23am BST
2.08am BST
And Frewoini Baume, 18, has sent through the first few images of the Lismore strikes.
The message is clear: a striker in Lismore.Photograph: Frewoini Baume
Updated at 2.11am BST
2.03am BST
If people want a last minute sign for the climate strike First Dog on the Moon says you can print this out on vegan paper and wave it about. 
If people want a last minute sign for the climate strike First Dog on the Moon says you can print this out on vegan paper and wave it aboutPhotograph: Andrew Marlton/First Dog on the Moon
2.00am BST
More dispatches from Esther in Byron: 
People march in the street in Byron Bay , during the September 20 Climate Strike, 2019, NSW, Australia.Photograph: Supplied
Video from Esther Plummer (13) of the Byron Bay #climatestrike           pic.twitter.com/ettK3Ms785
 - Naaman Zhou (@naamanzhou) September 20, 2019
1.56am BST
In Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands
There are big contingents and great photos coming in from all across the Pacific - especially Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands right now.
'No climate peace' - Vanuatu government will announce that is prepared to take polluting 'countries and corporations' to court to safeguard the lives of the people of Vanuatu. #ClimateStrike           #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/tbtJwavR2b
 - Dan McGarry (@dailypostdan) September 20, 2019
Amazing photos coming in from the Solomon Islands where they're kicking off the Global #ClimateStrikes.            pic.twitter.com/Ul4SZ4XDWY
 - Jamie Henn (@Agent350) September 20, 2019
These young people in the Solomon Islands have done absolutely nothing to cause the climate crisis. But as their slogan goes: they're not drowning, they're fighting. Join them. #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/5NSliWkwtd
 - Jamie Henn (@Agent350) September 20, 2019
Updated at 2.00am BST
1.51am BST
And in Castlemaine, Victoria, where this all began (in Australia at least), there are no signs of slowing.
Some of the early Castlemaine contingent heading to the #ClimateStrike in Melbourne. Its going to be a huge day.            pic.twitter.com/BQUcVhlnSz
 - Friends of the Earth (@FoEAustralia) September 19, 2019
Updated at 2.00am BST
1.47am BST
Early signs from University of Sydney:
Here are the three winners of our slogan contest #USYDSoc           #GlobalClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/VEUgDuB9sr
 - susan banki (@susanbanki) September 20, 2019
And nearby, stores all along King Street have closed for the day in solidarity.
Climate change strike posters sign along King Street, Newtown.Photograph: Supplied
Updated at 1.50am BST
1.45am BST
In Gloucester New South Wales we have an early contender for best costume today (the sunflower).
Some pint-sized #climatestrike protesters in Gloucester. ?? by Caroline Davidson            pic.twitter.com/AdVDpV6qbr
 - Helen Davidson (@heldavidson) September 20, 2019
In a landmark decision earlier this year, a court blocked a new coalmine in the region because of the "dire consequences" of increasing emissions.
Related: Court rules out Hunter Valley coalmine on climate change grounds
Updated at 1.51am BST
1.29am BST
Absolutely huge turnout in Geelong where they're singing and chanting.
At Geelong City Hall for the #ClimateStrike. Huge turnout            pic.twitter.com/AA5Pbdo151
 - Asher Moses (@ashermoses) September 20, 2019
"No planet B" song at Geelong #ClimateStrike           pic.twitter.com/5xrMAXkSzc
 - Asher Moses (@ashermoses) September 20, 2019
And more from Townsville:
Townsville locals #Strike4Climate, not a single southern latte-sipper in sight.            pic.twitter.com/VjAYF9qfrB
 - Terry Hughes (@ProfTerryHughes) September 20, 2019
It's not even 11am yet on the east coast and it's already obvious today's protests are going to be bigger than ever before. 
Updated at 1.33am BST
1.26am BST
First Barnesy now The Oils:
We support today's #climatestrike - "it happens to be an emergency". Look at these average annual temps (dark red = hottest years). For everyone, especially the young, we are now at the crossroads.            pic.twitter.com/k9XZoL44oE
 - Midnight Oil (@midnightoilband) September 20, 2019
Updated at 1.33am BST
1.23am BST
In Vanuatu: 
"We're fighting, not drowning' Climate strike gets under way in Vanuatu. #ClimateEmergency           pic.twitter.com/74C5ctoMLD
 - Dan McGarry (@dailypostdan) September 20, 2019
1.22am BST
The Knitting Nannas are already down in Lismore.
1.17am BST
Our first student on the ground Esther Plummer  (13)  has sent pictures from Byron Bay. 
Children from Byron Bay strike to demand action on climate change, 20 September 2019.Photograph: Supplied
Updated at 1.23am BST
1.15am BST
Greta Thunberg wishes Pacific nations good luck
It's early morning in the Pacific. Soon the sun will rise on September 20th 2019. Good luck Australia, The Philippines, Japan and all the Pacific islands. You go first! Now lead the way! #fridaysforfuture           #climatestrike           #schoolstrike4climate(NZ + many others go next week.)            pic.twitter.com/u1pji4SySN
 - Greta Thunberg (@GretaThunberg) September 19, 2019
Updated at 1.35am BST
1.10am BST
Earlier we said 1,000 businesses are supporting the strike. That number is now 2,600, with the latest figures from Not Business As Usual.
1.05am BST
And here is music legend (and all-round legend) Jimmy Barnes, with his message of support to the strikers.
"Come down and show your support for the kids": Cold Chisel frontman Jimmy Barnes will be attending #climatestrike in Mackay, Queensland.            pic.twitter.com/Dfzyp0tjmt
 - Guardian Australia (@GuardianAus) September 19, 2019
12.58am BST
In New Caledonia: 
12.51am BST
Big turnout in Townsville. The event there started at 9am and they will be marching at 10am.
Townsville #Strike4Climate, the crowd is 3-4 time larger than last year!            pic.twitter.com/ujXAtVUAbk
 - Terry Hughes (@ProfTerryHughes) September 19, 2019
12.43am BST
Protesters are staging a die-in in the centre of Alice Springs.
'Dying to save the planet'- protestors send a message in the Alice Springs Todd Mall pic.twitter.com/ONy0rv3KV6
 - Katrina Beavan (@katrina_beavan) September 19, 2019
Traditional owners have stressed the importance of putting Indigenous perspectives at the centre of these protests. 
Yesterday Sammy Wilson, a custodian of Uluru and chair of the Central Land Council, announced that the council will join the strike across the Northern Territory. 
"Aboriginal people want to be part of the solution," he said. "We want to have access to clean technologies such as solar power so that our children have the chance to keep living on our traditional country.
"I support their right to take this action [and] I call on them to spare a thought for Aboriginal people out bush who may not be able to travel to the strikes but who are already suffering most during our hotter, longer and drier summers."
After the NT's hottest summer on record, delegates at the council meeting last month said climate change and water security were their top policy priorities.
Updated at 1.20am BST
12.33am BST
Kate Lamb in Jakarta writes:
In Indonesia the climate strikes come as the country faces an escalating environmental emergency - tens of thousands of hectares of rainforest are burning in Sumatra and Kalimantan, home to some of the largest swathes of virgin forest in the world.
This year the annual fires - a result of "slash and burn" practices to clear land mostly for palm oil plantations - have been exacerbated by the El Nino phenomenon and severe droughts. Thick haze has blanketed cities in Indonesia and neighbouring Singapore and Malaysia, and also forced schools to be closed and increased the risk of respiratory-related illnesses.
Also on the minds of young Indonesian activists is how to curb the country's plastic addiction. Home to more than 250 million people, Indonesia is the second largest contributor to ocean plastics after China. But in recent years environmental awareness around plastics has gained momentum, largely driven by inspiring Indonesian students, artists, musicians and activists.
On Friday hundreds are expected to take to the streets of Jakarta and 12 cities across the archipelago, on the islands of Java, Sumatra, Kalimantan and Bali.
Expect colourful costumes, live performances from local indie bands, and talk of an "energy revolution". From here in the steamy tropics, the focus of that discussion will be on the future of solar energy.
Updated at 1.18am BST
12.28am BST
More from the Pacific from Kate Lyons 
Climate strike events kicked off in Tonga yesterday (which held its main event - a community clean-up on Thursday because of the significant number of Seventh Day Adventists in the country who observe the Sabbath on Fridays). Pacific countries, many of which are bearing the brunt of the effects of the climate crisis, are holding events today, though most are not holding strikes or traditional protests, instead focusing on community events such as clean-ups, barbecues and poetry performances. 
View this post on Instagram 
As the sun rises in the pacific, we rise to sound of the wind blowing, the calling of the Matagi Malohi. Calling us all to action! And while we cannot all strike, even our youngest of activists understands the gravity of today. #MatagiMalohi #ClimateStrike #PacificPawa #PacificClimateWarriors
A post shared by 350 Pacific (@pacificclimatewarriors) on Sep 19, 2019 at 2:15pm PDT
Updated at 1.09am BST
12.24am BST
Things are already well under way in Alice Springs. Up to 60 local businesses have also shut their doors for today.
Big crowd in Alice Springs for the climate strike- large focus is on impact climate change is having on indigenous people in remote communities pic.twitter.com/1oTAEcVJZr
 - Katrina Beavan (@katrina_beavan) September 19, 2019
Meanwhile preparations continue around the country.
Early arrivals at the #CoffsHarbour           #ClimateStrike with top rate signage. Rally kicks off at 10am we are so pumped ???????            pic.twitter.com/vxhcOvrNHi
 - Liisa Rusanen (@liisa_sr) September 19, 2019
Updated at 1.15am BST
12.17am BST
Eleanor Ainge Roy writes from Dunedin
New Zealand is pushing back its participation in the strikes to Friday 27 September so high school students can sit national exams this week. Large strikes are planned nationwide.
Sea level rise is a real and increasingly urgent threat to New Zealand. Most of New Zealand's nearly 5 million people live on the coast. Sea walls to protect vulnerable communities are being constructed - from the former gold-mining town of Hokitika on the west coast to vulnerable beachside huts in the isolated far north. Sea level rise is also a pressing issue for the country's Indigenous people, with their tribal marae [meeting houses] mostly on low-lying coastal land.
Jacinda Ardern's Labour coalition government has vowed to tackle climate change head on, committing to making the country carbon neutral by 2050 and planting 1bn trees. 
The first climate strike in New Zealand was interrupted by the Christchurch mosque attacks, with children in central Christchurch shepherded into lockdown for hours. It was initially thought, incorrectly, that the striking children may have been a target. 
Amnesty International Aotearoa New Zealand's policy manager, Annaliese Johnston, says New Zealand youth climate groups have been instrumental in increasing awareness in the Pacific region.
"The youth of today in New Zealand... have woken us all up to the urgent call to action to protect our common home and future."
Updated at 1.14am BST
12.07am BST
Greta Thunberg,  the 16-year old Swedish student who inspired this movement, has recorded a short film for today's strike.
In it, she and Guardian columnist George Monbiot talk about the importance of natural solutions - low-cost, effective initiatives such as rowing trees.
And for a bit of a blast from the past you can read Thunberg's opinion piece from November 2018 - written specifically for Australia - when we became one of the first countries to hold nationwide student strikes. 
Related: I'm striking from school to protest inaction on climate change - you should too | Greta Thunberg
Updated at 1.00am BST
12.00am BST
"In the Pacific we don't go on strike, but we do other things," says Patricia Mallam, a Fijian climate activist from 350.org. Over the course of the day children and students from Fiji, Samoa, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Marshall Islands, Tonga, New Caledonia, the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea will take part in poetry performances, silent protests, sporting events, barbecues and intergenerational discussions about the effects of climate change in the region.
These events rather than traditional protests and street marches make more sense for the Pacific, says Mallam, because it is such a community-driven region "and we all know that the problem is not within the community".
#ClimateStrike events will kick off (appropriately) in the Pacific. "It is a day for the polluters, they need to quickly understand what's going on," says Patricia Mallam from            @350Pacific. "But the Pacific is at the frontline of the impacts, it's important for us to speak up."            pic.twitter.com/wXeYz7mKJk
 - Kate Lyons (@MsKateLyons) September 19, 2019
"For instance, you don't have any coalmines in the Pacific, so we can't have people striking outside coalmines. The problems are not being caused here. But in countries where there are coalmines or banks financing the fossil-fuel industry, it makes sense for people to go on strike, so they're voicing their distaste for what's going on to keep their economies afloat," she says over the phone from Fiji. "We all know that the problem is not being caused here in the Pacific, but we're facing the full brunt of the climate crisis." The Pacific is estimated to contribute just 0.03% of global emissions despite making up 0.12% of the world's population, but is at the frontline of the climate emergency, with countries facing rising sea levels, coastal erosion, the destruction of crucial reefs, inundations and warming seas that lead to more frequent and more severe cyclones. "It is a day, especially for the polluters, they need to quickly understand what's going on," says Mallam. "But at the same time, in the Pacific we feel that because we're at the frontline of the impacts, it's important for us to speak up and have other nations hear what's happening."
Updated at 1.07am BST
12.00am BST
Preparations are under way in the Solomon Islands already.
Riding the waves of change, youth are arriving now via boat in Marovo in the Western Province of the Solomon Islands ready for their #climatestrike           #MatagiMalohi event today. .            #pacificpawa           pic.twitter.com/ytwnX8k7cg
 - 350 Pacific (@350Pacific) September 19, 2019
And Kate Lyons  spoke to some of the activists across the Pacific ahead of today's big day.
Updated at 1.08am BST
11.54pm BST
Here's everything you need to know about today's strikes as collated by my colleague Lisa Cox.
There are more than 100 locations, and the strikes have support from 30 unions, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, and more than 1,000 businesses including Atlassian, Future Super and KeepCup.
Related: Climate strike in Australia: everything you need to know about Friday's protest
And in news from this morning, more than 250 academics have also signed on in support.
Related: Hundreds of Australian academics declare support for climate rebellion
Updated at 12.58am BST
11.47pm BST
In Australia today
Morning everyone. Today the global climate strikes start in Australia and the Pacific. The Guardian Australia team will follow it all.
We have a huge day of coverage planned. The Australian strikes will be in full swing from 11am or noon (local time) and before that in New Zealand and the Pacific.
Our correspondents are standing by, and cartoonist First Dog on the Moon is on duty - they'll be sketching throughout the day. 
And because today is really about the students, we've organised to receive on-the-ground updates from participants. Here they are in a (non-exhaustive) list:
    • Narii-Hamill Salmon, 15, Gold Coast Qld
    • Frewoini Baume, 18, Lismore NSW
    • Josh O'Callaghan, 15, Adelaide SA
    • Amelia Neylon, 16, Hobart Tas
    • Esther Plummer, 13, Byron Bay NSW
    • Iestyn (13) and Owynn (11) Harries, Brisbane Qld
    • Dakota Barret-Perry, 15, Melbourne Vic
They have also been given the opportunity to ask a question directly of federal politicians and prominent business leaders - from the energy minister to EnergyAustralia.
We'll publish the questions and their answers throughout the day. 
Stay with us.
Updated at 1.36am BST
11.31pm BST
Hello
For the next 24 hours, the Guardian will be reporting in real time on the wave of climate strikes as they ripple around the world, starting in the Asia-Pacific region and continuing through Europe and Africa before culminating in the Americas. Millions of young people are expected to turn out in more than 3,000 events worldwide in this latest edition of the Fridays For Future strikes. On this occasion, adults have been invited to join in and companies, organisations, trade unions, even churches are expected to join the fray. Our correspondents on the ground will be feeding in with live updates from the world's major metropolises, and we'll be pausing for breath every now and then to consider the bigger picture, the state we're in, the scale of the challenge. The strike kicks off a big week for environmental activism with a major            climate action summit at the UN next week and another round of Friday strikes on the 27th. The Guardian will be at these events too.
Updated at 12.55am BST
293132019-09-21T22:00:00Ztrue2019-09-19T22:31:53Zfalsefalse2019-09-21T01:55:07ZfalseUStheguardian.comhttps://gu.com/p/cc5kgtruetruehttps://media.guim.co.uk/5128beb0fe2379c481c9b8e67e8e126984e25355/0_0_3500_2100/500.jpgfalseenFor the past 24 hours, the Guardian has been reporting in real time as millions of people joined in a worldwide, youth-led climate strike - with correspondents filing dispatches from the demonstrations across the globe. We're ending our liveblog here , but not our commitment to covering the climate crisis. Read our roundup of the historic day of action: A moment of appreciation for the doggos These puppers want action on climate change right now. And maybe also a treat, please? Thousands of tech employees walked out of their workplaces to join the climate strike Workers from Microsoft, Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Twitter staged walkouts in what may be the largest coordinated worker action in the history of the tech industry. At the demonstration in Seattle, more than 3,000 tech workers walked out of their workplaces on Friday and thousands more joined actions across the country, according to Amazon Employees for Climate Justice, a group calling for Amazon to make more effort to address climate change. Globally, more than 1,800 Amazon employees walked out across 25 cities and 14 countries on Friday to protest the company's failure to take more action to address the climate crisis. Jeff Bezos, Amazon's CEO, has made some efforts to address climate concerns, including an announcement on Thursday that the company expects to be carbon neutral by 2040 and a February announcement of a goal, known as Shipment Zero, to be carbon neutral on 50% of shipments by 2030. But workers are asking for more: zero emissions by 2030, increasing the number of electric vehicles in its fleet, and refusing to set contracts with companies that damage the climate. "Amazon still has a long way to go," said Danilo Quilaton, product designer at Amazon in San Francisco. "What kind of climate leader can we be if we're still partnering with fossil fuel companies, selling our AI technologies to extract oil faster?" Other tech companies were present at marches in San Francisco and beyond. Twitter workers walked out, marching alongside workers from tech payment firm Square in San Francisco. Facebook workers walked out of offices around the country, including employees who left the headquarters in San Jose. More than 1,800 workers at Google signed a pledge supporting climate action from the company, including zero emissions by 2030, eliminating contracts with oil and gas companies, and promising zero harm to climate refugees. Hundreds walked out of Google offices across the US, including in New York City and at the headquarters in San Jose. "As individuals, we may feel alone in facing climate change," the Google petition said. "But if we act together - if we act now - we can build a better future." Amazon workers join the climate strike Hundreds of Amazon workers left their desks Friday to join a thousands-strong climate strike march in Seattle. Workers rallied in front of Amazon's focal point - the Amazon Spheres, geodesic glass terrariums marking the company's center of gravity in downtown Seattle - before marching to city hall. The mood was light, their march well ordered and rife with signage playing on Amazon slogans, including "Customer Obsessed = Climate Obsessed". Those gathered joked that they were skipping a lunch at their desks to join the noontime protest. The grim realities of the climate crisis were mentioned, particularly the challenges facing Amazon warehouse workers in southern California, but the 2,000-or-so workers and throngs of supporters were prepared to celebrate. They'd won, after all, Amazon's first broad pledge to contain its carbon footprint. EVAN: Bobbing along with a stream of colleagues, Evan Pulgino was awestruck. Pulgino, a software engineer from Pittsburgh who arrived in Seattle three years ago to work at Amazon, was a face in the crowd of several thousand Amazon and Google employees and their supporters. Badges colored to mark seniority, standard at Amazon, hung from lanyards and fobs. Having set out from the Amazon Spheres in downtown Seattle, the tech crowd merged with throngs of high schoolers arriving on Fifth Avenue to join the march on Seattle's City Hall. Pulgino described the disparate mass of humanity - Amazon's orderly herd of 20s and 30-somethings mixing with exuberant teens - as "incredible". Pulgino, who has been active on climate issues since October, said he was cheered by the commitment made Thursday by Amazon to attain zero net carbon emissions by 2040. It was a start, he said, and a heartening one. Pulgino objected to Amazon's continued financial support for climate change-denying thinktanks and politicians, and to Amazon Web Services' contracts with fossil fuel companies. "It was important to be part of the fight," said Pulgino, carrying a sign that read "Stop funding climate denial, start leading for zero emissions". "Tech drives so much change," the 38-year-old continued. "If Amazon leads the way, other companies will follow." ROSHNI: Roshni Naidu, a five-year Amazon veteran, expected something out of Finding Nemo when last year she traveled to Australia to take in the Great Barrier Reef. Naidu, 28, was shocked to find a graying, vacant space. "It was nothing at all like what I expected," said Naidu, a senior technical product manager. Returning to Seattle shaken by witnessing the degradation of the planet, Naidu got to work at her work. She began agitating with other Amazon employees for the company to get it right on climate change. Amazon, she said, can lead on climate. She described herself as "cautiously celebratory" after company leaders announced a suite of climate change-related reforms aimed at eliminating Amazon's carbon footprint by 2040. "It's a sign that collective action works," Naidu said. Friday's march, she added, "puts even more pressure on Amazon to do more." It's great, she said, to be able to say she's "saving the world". NICK: Milling among his climate activist colleagues, Nick Andrews, a program manager now in his sixth year at Amazon, was ready to scream. Which, as a chant leader, was his job for the afternoon. Andrews, 32, had been active for months pushing Amazon to reduce its climate footprint and cut ties to the fossil fuel industry. Like several of his colleagues, he struck a tone more disappointed than angry. Amazon workers tend to believe their company can do anything, including save the planet. At the outset, Andrews said, pushing the sometimes autocratic company seemed like it would be nerve-racking work. It didn't turn out that way. "Everyone came in with trepidation," Andrews said. "But it's really received a company-wide embrace." It helps, he said, that he and other Amazonians turn out - unsurprisingly to those who've watched the company come to dominate the retail economy and cloud computing - to be "very good organizers". He celebrated on Thursday when Amazon leaders announced a series of steps designed to eliminate Amazon's net carbon footprint. He looks forward to Amazon doing more, though. "We pride ourselves on being a bar-pushing company," Andrews said. "This is a good start, but I think we can do better." The Guardian has partnered with Friends of the Earth to highlight the climate crisis and raise funds for the charity, which is doing so much to address the damage that has been done and continues to be done to the planet. Scenes from Richmond, California - a town under Chevron's shadow The main climate strike action in the Bay Area today was in the center of San Francisco, always a magnet for regional progressive activism. But across the bay, Richmond, population 110,000, more than held its own. The small crowd at the city's civic center peaked at about 100 before a short youth-led march. Speakers took turns addressing the group from atop a park bench, rallying with call-and-response chants and songs, and impromptu speeches about factory farming, a Green New Deal and geoengineering. But while this may have been a small branch of a global day of action, the main thrust here was local issues, as residents shared updates on local organizing efforts to stop the climate pollution happening in their own town. Richmond is actually younger than the 117-year-old, 2,900 acre Chevron oil refinery that occupies much of the city's scenic bayside hillscape, and the fossil fuel giant has long exerted outsized influence not just over the city's environment, but also its politics. Richmond also feels the impact of over a million tons of coal and petroleum byproducts exported from its bayside terminal each year - the city's asthma rates are far above those of other Bay Area communities. Urgency on the global climate crisis won the day worldwide, but in Richmond and other front-line cities, the impacts of the fossil fuel industry and issues of environmental justice feel even more immediately dire. 'It is like they are burning our soul': Brazil's indigenous people call for international help At the third Rio de Janeiro demonstration of the day, Tereza Arapiun, a chief from the Arapiun tribe from the Amazon state of Pará, called for international help for Brazil's indigenous people. "We are surrounded by destruction, loggers and mining," she said. "We need help." Amazon deforestation, fires and land invasions worsened under Brazil's President Jair Bolsonaro, she said. "He encourages it. Before, there was protection. He destroyed it." Arapiun welled up as she told how a friend described hearing the screams of dying animals as fires raged recently near Alter do Chão, a renowned beauty spot in the same state. "It is very painful. It is like they are burning our soul," she said. "We need help - and help won't come from Brazil." Colombian demonstrators demand a world "without plastic and without war" Demonstrators have begun to gather at parks and squares across Colombia now. Here in Bogotá - the capital - the historic Plaza de Bolívar in front of the congress building is slowly drawing crowds despite the rain. "Colombia, our land," one group of students chanted as they arrived. "Without plastic and without war!" Near the statue of the country's independence hero Simón Bolívar, demonstrators banged drums and burnt incense, waving signs that read "Rebel or burn out". "When the problem is as urgent as climate change, it's only by coming together that we can make a difference," said Alejandra Moreno, a student from Bogotá. Unlike many similar events around the world, this one was not preceded by a major strike and schools were open as normal. This could be because events got little publicity in local media. The two main dailies, El Espectador and El Tiempo, ran agency-written stories online on worldwide strikes that did not once mention Colombia. Instead, the mantle to promote today's march was picked up by an opposition political party, Colombia Humana, and local environmental activists. Both used social media extensively. "Why in London are people so willing to move to pressure their government and the world for drastic measures to attack the climate crisis and not in Colombia, if the problem is the same?" the senator Gustavo Petro - the leader of Colombia Humana and a former presidential candidate - tweeted this morning. "Because of something called asymmetrical information: in Colombia the danger is ignored." Colombia has made efforts to position itself as a regional leader on environmental issues, recently hosting a summit in its Amazonian city Leticia, where Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru agreed on measures to tackle the nearby raging rainforest fires. However, local activists say it is just window-dressing given that Colombia remains one of the most dangerous countries for environmentalists. Twenty-four environmental activists were murdered here in 2018, second only to the Philippines, according to the watchdog Global Witness. "Colombia is living through constant threats of damage to ecosystems and deforestation, and our cities are heating up," said Isabel Cristina Zuleta, an environmental activist with the Rios Vivos movement, who has received many death threats for her work. She was attending a march in Medellín, Colombia's second largest city. "In Colombia, to protest and to march is to put yourself at risk," Zuleta said. "That's why today it is so important to see people in the streets." Protesters in Miami Beach wrap it up, head to "End of the World" after party The climate strike has wrapped up in Miami Beach after a "historic" day that saw thousands of schoolchildren, college students and workers gather at two events at city hall. But organizers say this is just the start of something much bigger. "You saw how many people were here, it was incredible," said youth climate activist John Paul Mejia, who spoke at the morning school strike and evening rally for those who couldn't take time off during the day. "Now we need to keep the conversation going, to build on this historic day and get things done." The Miami protestors were heading for an after-strike party with live music at a bar in nearby Overtown arranged by 350southflorida, an environmental group. The relaxation will be short, however. Next week's planned protest activities include a sit-in at Miami Beach's sustainability committee meeting and a strike in downtown Miami at Chase Bank, which 350southflorida says is the world's biggest funder of fossil fuels. The "week of action" wraps up with an End of the World party on the second Global Climate Strike day next Friday. Young activists in Brazil: less CO2, more vida There were small demonstrations across Brazil on Friday. In the morning, dozens of school and university students occupied the steps of Rio de Janeiro's state legislature in hot sun. They sang, waved placards and called for the removal of business-friendly environment minister Ricardo Salles. Striking high school student Maria Hardman, 15, was angry over far-right president Jair Bolsonaro's failure to protect the Amazon. "He does not value the environment," she said. "Bolsonaro is an imbecile. He does not represent me." Brazilians have yet to grasp the scale of the climate emergency, said Mariana Império, 30, a masters student at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. Thalita Alves, 20, a trainee teacher at the Federal Fluminense University, said people began waking up when fires in the Bolivian Amazon caused São Paulo skies to darken. "Brazilians who voted for Bolsonaro ... faithfully believe what he says," she said. Later another demonstration marched from Ibama, the environmental agency, to the city centre. High school students formed a human mosaic reading: "Save the Amazon" in Recife and held up placards with data on Amazon fires in Salvador. Students marched in the town of Novo Friburgo and in the capital Brasília, an SOS Amazon banner was hung on the walls of the environment ministry. In the Amazon city of Belém, hundreds gathered beside the Marajó Bay. "Coming from the Amazon, I feel it's a duty to fight," said Lidia Seabra, 24, studying a masters in biology at the Federal University of Pará. "We are united here to defend the Amazon," said engineering student Devyison de Jesus, 21. In São Paulo, a few thousand blocked Paulista Avenue after cheering speeches from children such as Cora Ramos, 10, who held up a placard she had made that read "there is no planet B". "If we destroy this one, there won't be another," she said. Brazilian activists were also present at marches abroad. Alessandra Munduruku, an indigenous activist from the Munduruku tribe of Pará state, made a short, powerful speech to an enormous crowd in Berlin. "My people are grateful to have good people fighting and defending the Amazon," she said through a translator to deafening cheers. "I saw many children, many young people, parents, old people, I thought that demonstration was very beautiful," she told the Guardian. "I had goosebumps." Mexico City protestors to AMLO: "We want a future, not hydrocarbons!" Climate protests started early outside the National Palace in central Mexico City, where President Andrés Manuel López Obrador usually holds a daily press conference. The president - commonly called AMLO - was instead in the state of Yuctán on Friday and didn't speak of the climate issue. But he boasted, "The fall in [Mexican] petroleum production has stopped and we're starting to produce more petroleum.... We're now producing more petrol in Mexico's refineries." AMLO has bet big on boosting Mexico's petroleum output and promised to lower the price of gasoline. He's also pushed ahead with plans to build an $8bn refinery in the state of Tabasco - even starting construction prior to completing the environmental permits. AMLO also cancelled an electricity auction, which would have allowed more renewable energy into the market, and the Federal Electricity Commission (CRE) has announced plans to instead burn more coal. "There a campaign that renewables are cheaper and it's a lie," CFE director Manuel Bartlett said earlier this year. The government's focus on fossil fuels has put in question the country's commitment to generate 35% of its energy with renewables by 2024, according to climate change analysts. Marchers in Mexico City targeted AMLO, chanting, "We want a future, not hydrocarbons!" Greta Thunberg: "Change is coming whether they like it or not." The crowd in Battery Park roared in anticipation of Greta Thunberg, who was introduced by Alexandria Villaseñor, Thunberg's NYC equivalent who her spends her Fridays protesting outside the UN headquarters in New York City. "Greta! Greta! Greta!" the crowd chanted as Thunberg got on the stage. The 16-year-old started her speech off by marking the number of people who participated in the strike around the world. In New York City, 250,000 people marched. Worldwide, more than 4m demonstrated. Thunberg's directed her speech to the hundreds of students in the crowd, though she acknowledged that adults also skipped worked to strike. "We will do everything in our power to stop this crisis from getting worse, even if it means skipping school or work, because this is more important," Thunberg said. "Why should we study for a future that is being taken away from us?" Thunberg had to pause her speech twice to point out that people in the crowd needed medical attention. Many people had been in the sun all afternoon waiting for Thunberg to speak. The crowd patiently waited for Thunberg to start speaking again, each time cheering when she continued. Thunberg elicited laughter when she described all the politicians she had met who asked for selfies and "tell us they really, really admire what we do" yet have done nothing to address the climate crisis. "We demand a safe future. Is that really to much to ask?" "No!" the crowd shouted back. At the end of her speech, Thunberg emphasized that the strikes around the world are just the start of change. "If you belong to that small group of people who feel threatened by us, we have some very bad news for you, because this is only the beginning," Thunberg said. "Change is coming whether they like it or not." Students in the crowd said they felt moved seeing Thunberg speak in person. "I started crying. I just found it powerful and empowering," said Juliana Rubiano, 16. "She represents a lot of people, and that's us, that's the youth." Californians are no strangers to the climate crisis fight - and now they're taking on the federal government California is not a place that requires convincing that the climate is changing. The people here don't even need to see the science - they're feeling the impacts firsthand, as the state teeters between an eroding coastline and growing wildland fires. Perhaps because of its many vulnerabilities, California has taken arguably the strongest stance of any US state in fighting the climate crisis, at times also fighting with the federal government in the process. When the Trump administration moved to undo California's strict vehicle emissions standards this month, the state vowed to fight. Governor Gavin Newsom hit back with, of course, a tweet: "We will prevail. See you in court." Earlier this week, the University of California pledged to divest over $80bn in endowment and pension funds from fossil fuel companies, citing the "financial risk" posed by the industry, compared to renewable energy. Climate advocates called it the biggest single commitment by any university, and perhaps the beginning of a new divesting trend. California cities, including Berkeley and San Jose, are leading the country with a wave of local laws to phase out natural gas hook-ups in new construction, despite strong and well-funded opposition from the gas industry. Natural gas is the greatest source of carbon emissions from buildings, while fully electrifying homes and businesses could allow them to run on clean, renewable energy instead. California's municipalities have also taken direct aim at the industry responsible for so much of the climate crisis. Eight cities and counties in the state have filed civil lawsuits against fossil fuel companies, alleging public nuisance and in some cases negligence. The suits seek billions of dollars in damages to help mitigate climate impacts. Maanvi Singh, here - taking up the Guardian's live climate strike coverage from the West Coast. Coming up, West Coast environment correspondent Susie Cagle will be sharing sketches and scenes from the demonstration in Richmond, California, across the bay from San Francisco. A Chevron refinery older than the town itself looms over it, and the area is home to some of the boldest climate-minded activism in California. Technology reporter Kari Paul will be following up on climate walkouts at Amazon, Twitter, Facebook and Google. And Los Angeles correspondent Sam Levin will bring us dispatches from the protests in southern California. Mexico City protests: thousands take to the streets Thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets of Mexico City to join the global climate strike this afternoon. "Se ve, se siente, la tierra está caliente," the crowds shouted as they processed down the city's main avenue, Reforma towards its presidential palace. "You see it, you feel it. The earth is getting hotter." Protesters - many of them school children and teenagers - carried homemade banners reading: "There's no money in a dead earth" and "Action now!" One placard urged demonstrators to make love, not CO2. There were reports of other demonstrations, big and small, across Mexico in cities including Acapulco, Irapuato, Guadalajara and Tijuana. Unlike in Brazil, where far-right president Jair Bolsonaro has ignored today's movement, the protests received the blessing of the Mexican government which tweeted its support. In a Twitter video Victor Toledo, Mexico's environment secretary, urged the country to reflect on the environment "insurgency" taking place around the world and to take action where possible. 'There is no Planet B' Best friends Amaya Mejia, 10, and Scarlett Harrison, 11, skipped school together to join the Miami Beach youth climate strike, after staying up late the night before to craft their placards. Amaya opted for a globe with the simple message: "There is no Planet B". "You need to listen to us, it's the only planet we've got and we need to protect it," said Amaya, who attends the Gulliver private school in Coral Gables. Messages on banners ranged from simple and effective like Amaya's, to the deeply political and often comical. "The government can regulate my uterus but not single-use plastics?" read one. Another student held aloft a sign informing the crowd: "I'm not showing up for school because adults aren't showing up for children," while another said: "You'll die of old age, I'll die of climate change." More locally-themed placards, referencing the threat of sea level rise to Miami Beach, a hugely popular tourism destination, included one that read: "Take a stand before our city is all sand." My favorite, however, was perhaps the most understated message of the day. "I'm very upset," it read. Covering Climate Now Covering the climate crisis is absolutely core to the Guardian's editorial mission. And all this week, we have been a lead partner in Covering Climate Now, an initiative founded earlier this year with the Columbia Journalism Review and the Nation. This has led to more than 250 newsrooms representing 32 countries - with a combined monthly reach of more than a billion people - signing on to amplify and share content on climate change. There has been a burst of coverage this week on the Guardian and beyond ahead of the UN climate summit next week on Monday 23 September. Check out some of our pieces this week including: The silenced: meet the climate whistleblowers muzzled by Trump The sinking class: the New Yorkers left to fight the climate crisis alone How TV weathercasters became the unsung heroes of the climate crisis 'Like a sunburn on your lungs': how does the climate crisis impact health? Thousands of people are striking in Boston, Massachusetts Organizers expected some 10,000 people to rally at City Hall Plaza for the Boston Climate Strike organized by youth climate activists. Boston City Councilor Michelle Wu and former Environmental Protection Agency head Gina McCarthy were among scheduled speakers, according to NBC10 Boston. Miami striker: 'Does it matter if we're under 15 feet of water or 50 feet?' Dan Gelber, the mayor of Miami Beach, received a warmer reception than any politician might have expected when he emerged to address the hundreds of student climate campaigners making a racket right outside his office window. Perhaps it's the $500m dollars his city is investing over the next five years to combat the effects of sea level rise, which already leaves neighborhoods under water during higher than usual tides. Scientists predict up to a three feet sea level rise by 2050. Gelber pointed out the strides already taken to improve things on this island city barely seven by one miles in size: an aggressive program of elevating roads and laying larger capacity drainage pipes, along with investing in modern pump equipment and technology to faster shift the rising flood waters. It's little wonder the environmentally-conscious city's slogan is Rising Above. And today the Miami Herald reported on what could become the city's most ambitious project yet, a proposal to turn the city-owned golf course into a 115-acre wetland park, which the newspaper says is certain to test the boundaries of what the public will accept in the name of resilience. "Change is never easy," Miami Beach commissioner Ricky Arriola said. "If we're truly serious about dealing with climate change then everything is on the table, including the golf course. If we're not willing to even talk about it then we're just paying lip service." Gabriella Marchesani, 17, organizer of the Miami Beach youth climate strike, praises the city's efforts but says more needs to be done to address the causes of the climate crisis as well as dealing with its effects. "Miami Beach has spent a lot of money on adaptation, it can be the leading city and we hope other cities in Florida will follow," she said. "But this cannot be done slowly, and we need climate policy. Does it matter if we're under 15 feet of water or 50 feet?" Thousands converge on Battery Park, New York Most New York strikers have now made it down to Battery Park where a stage has been set up close to the water. Hundreds of people are packed around the stage, Greta is slated to speak, and many more are camped out sitting on the grass in the park. Young speakers took the stage giving personal testimonies of how the climate crisis is affecting them, denouncing politicians on both sides, saying just believing the facts isn't enough without action. When Jaden Smith took the stage, people started running the stage. In between two songs he reminded the crowd: "We gotta show people we care about this." Climate meme power Dorian victims convinced of link to climate change Reporting from the hurricane-hit Bahamas last week, I met David Dean, a sous chef at one of its holiday resorts. "My wife and kids had me as 'dead' on Facebook because they couldn't find me," he said. "When I called them, there was a lot of crying." Like many in these Caribbean islands, Dean is convinced that the climate crisis in making hurricanes such as Dorian more likely and more intense. "It was very hot," the 38-year-old said. "That's why the hurricane was coming to us. Heat brings the hurricane and makes it worse." Some 52 people are confirmed dead in the Bahamas, a figure expected to rise, and more than 1,300 are still missing. The scale of destruction was astonishing, as if a giant with a child's temperament had run amok, flipping over cars and buses like toys. As so often, the underclass suffers the most. The science is complex but this Guardian article explains how global heating made Dorian bigger, wetter and deadlier. Many in the Bahamas are determined to stay the course, not least because tourism is so crucial to the economy. The owners of the hard hit Treasure Cay beach, marine and golf resort declared their intention to rebuild. But some residents also expressed concern that such efforts could be undone by the next hurricane, and the one after that. For now the Bahamas is dealing with scars, mental and physical. Dean told me: "Now, if I feel a little rain, it might be drive me crazy. I'm traumatised. I don't ever want to go through that again." This video is great at capturing some of the scale of the New York action. Which countries contribute most to the climate crisis? How much is the US to blame? China produces the most heat-trapping pollution, followed by the US, the European Union, India and Russia. But historically, the US has contributed more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere than any other nation. The US also has high emissions per capita, compared to other developed countries. And Americans buy products made in China, therefore supporting China's carbon footprint. What has happened to the US Environmental Protection Agency with climate change? The EPA has begun efforts to eliminate climate rules for power plants, cars and the methane leaked from oil and gas facilities. Has the US already pulled out of the Paris accord? What if Democrats win next election? The US has not yet exited the international accord, in which every other nation on earth agreed to voluntarily begin to curb emissions. The deal was meant to prevent global average temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) above preindustrial levels. Technically, the US cannot leave the agreement until the day after the November 2020 election, when Trump will still be president regardless of the outcome. A Democrat president could rejoin the deal. Is Donald Trump making climate change worse with his rollbacks? The US is falling far short of its commitments to curb heat-trapping pollution, in part because Trump has gutted efforts made by his predecessor, Barack Obama. The country is on track to cut emissions 13% to 16% below 2005 levels by 2020, according to the analysis firm Rhodium Group. That's short of the 17% reduction the US promised in the Copenhagen Accord. "Looking ahead to 2025, the US is on track to achieve reductions anywhere from 12% to 19% below 2005 levels absent major policy changes-a far cry from its Paris Agreement pledge to reduce emissions 26% to 28%," Rhodium Group explains. The US, however, represents 15% of world emissions. Is Donald Trump a climate change denier? What is his record? Before becoming president, Trump called climate change a Chinese hoax. In an interview with Piers Morgan, he deflected questions about how his policies promote continued climate-change causing emissions. He said the US has "the cleanest climates" and "China, India, Russia, many other nations, they have not very good air, not very good water." Trump's White House has downplayed the dangers of the climate crisis, including disagreeing with a federal report showing it threatens the US economy. Many of the president's appointees have denied climate change, and government scientists say their work on the crisis has been silenced. It is, of course, worth keeping in mind today the specific demands that climate groups have for meaningful action. The Youth Climate Strike Coalition in the US, has issued a set of policy demands which includes: Transform our economy to 100% clean, renewable energy by 2030 and phase out all fossil fuel extraction through a just and equitable transition, creating millions of good jobs A halt to all leasing and permitting for fossil fuel extraction, processing and infrastructure projects immediately Respect of Indigenous Land and Sovereignty and Environmental Justice Protection and restoration of 50% of the world's lands and oceans including a halt to all deforestation by 2030 Investment in farmers and regenerative agriculture and an end to subsidies for industrial agriculture Downtown New York City is packed with sign-bearing people of all ages, though the crowd noticeably skews young. Students from all over NYC have come to the march. Many young children are accompanied by their parents while middle and high school students are here with their friends. Almost all groups have posters in hand. On the way down to the march, I caught up with students from Professional Performing Arts School, who caught the subway to attend the strike together. They met up at school and decided to go to the march in a group. "I just want the world to exist the way I knew it was growing up," said Nyla Robothan, a 15-year-old student at the school, on why she's striking. Many say this isn't their first march, having participating in other climate marches or the March For Our Lives protest in 2018. They say that they feel like their future feels uncertain because of the climate crisis, yet no one is listening to their generation. "Our planet is dying, and no one's going to be doing anything except for us right now," said Arlene Guevara, 17, a student at Beacon High School in Manhattan. The march is slowly making its way down to Battery Park at the southern tip of Manhattan, where speakers, including Greta Thunberg, are slated to speak in the afternoon. We are expecting hundreds of Amazon workers to strike later in their HQ city of Seattle, Washington. Levi Pulkkinen is there to report on this for us and ahead of the strikes there, sent us this explainer of how some of the giant firm's workers are taking action and Thursday's move by Jeff Bezos pledging to improve Amazon's environmental impact: After months agitating for climate accountability from their employer, Amazon.com workers celebrated Thursday as the Seattle-based retail and cloud computing giant pledged to zero out carbon emissions by 2040. The announcement from CEO Jeff Bezos came as about 1,500 Amazon workers prepared to walkout Friday as part of the global strike for climate change. The disruption would mark the first time white-collar Amazon workers have walked off the job. Asserting that Bezos' pledge "proves that collective action and employee pressure works," organizers of the stoppage reiterated demands that Amazon Web Services stop doing business with fossil fuel companies, and that the company cut ties with lobbyists, politicians and researchers hostile to climate science. Those calls were left unaddressed by the company, which did announce plans to acquire 100,000 electric delivery vans manufactured by an Amazon-funded company and an $100m commitment to an environmental restoration fund managed by The Nature Conservancy. In a statement, Bezos described the initiatives as evidencing a shift within Amazon. "We're done being in the middle of the herd on this issue - we've decided to use our size and scale to make a difference," Bezos said. "If a company with as much physical infrastructure as Amazon - which delivers more than 10 billion items a year - can meet the Paris Agreement 10 years early, then any company can." Amazon, making good on a promise offered earlier in the year, also for the first time released an accounting of its carbon footprint. The assessment, audited by Paris-based certification agency Bureau Veritas, showed Amazon's direct and indirect CO2 emissions amounted to 44.4 million metric tons in 2018, a year that saw 37.1 billion metric tons of the greenhouse gas released globally. The Guardian's Latin American correspondent Tom Phillips has spotted a striking banner in Guadalajara, Mexico. Here's some footage from climate strikes around the world today: Miami student Greta Rodriguez feels exactly the same way as the famous teenage climate activist who shares her first name, and had a similar message as she joined dozens of classmates to protest in Miami Beach: We've just had enough. The 15-year-old was among a party of 50 students from the Cushman private school in Key Biscayne who wanted to make their voices heard in this low-lying coastal city that is recognized as ground zero for sea level rise. "We've had enough of big business and their trash, burning fossil fuels, depleting the earth," she said. "It has to change." Chaperoned by biology teacher Jen Russell, the Cushman kids were among the loudest at the Miami Beach strike. "They wanted to be here and the student government association organized the whole thing," Russell said. "It was important to them. We can talk to them as adults but it's the children who have the voice, it's their future." The Miami Beach strike drew hundreds of students from schools, colleges and universities across South Florida. A similar, simultaneous event outside the Broward school district headquarters in Fort Lauderdale attracted another large crowd. While private schools such as Cushman turned up with numbers, local public school leaders proved less amenable to students walking out of classes, however. Elijah Ruby, 17, a senior at South Broward high school, was banned from his prom for handing out flyers for the Fort Lauderdale event, according to the Miami Herald, and both the Broward and Miami-Dade school districts announced that absences for the strike would be recorded as unexcused. At the New York event are Zariah, age seven, and Lori Sapphire, who says: "We're here to save the planet. So no packaging. It's an easy solution. Focus on solar energy. No more cars burning oil. Stop taking every mineral from the earth. Go back to the simple ways. "There's enough for everyone. Stop burning the forests because we want to eat meat and soybeans. Use hemp for everything. It almost a joke that everything were doing is being so selfishly and unconsciously. It like we're not from the planet, otherwise we'd care." The crowds in New York are massive but everyone is slowly making their way down to Battery Park. Earlier at the breakfast meeting for indigenous people from the Amazon and Indonesia, 19 year old Artemisa Barbosa Ribeiro, a climate activist known as Artemisa Xakriabá, told the Guardian she is thankful for all the young people who are joining the movement. " I can see a future where we can make a difference but for that we must be listened to and respected," she said, describing how her people, the Xakriabá peoples, a group of approximately 12 thousand people who live on the left bank of the São Francisco River, in the municipality of São João das Missões, in the state of Minas Gerais, have watched as mining companies have denied them access to the river and its water. "The scarcity of water in the territory is noticeable" she says. " We need the river and the water for our living and for our spiritual health, our connection to the earth. So access to the river is a big issue for us." Ribeiro, who was recently in Washington DC to demand action from members of the US congress alongside Greta Thunberg, said she felt that Jaire Bolsnaro's government have a plan for all indigenous people. "I believe they want to assassinate us," she said frankly. "It's got much worse in the last eight months. We need support from outside the country because from the inside we have no support. "The main thing you can do in the west to help is to stop importing hard wood because that is causing deforestation and exploitation. That is the best way you can help," Ribeiro added. Here is a message from Greta Thunberg, who will be making a speech at the New York event later in Battery Park: There are many, many hundreds of protesters in DC. Blocks and blocks of a roughly 6-lane street filled and more coming and marching toward the US Capitol. I can't see the end. This gives you a sense of how big the gathering in New York is - so many people want to participate. Delaney Reynolds has addressed the general assembly of the United Nations on the climate crisis. She has appeared in a prime time National Geographic special, written books, won awards, launched a non-profit battling sea rise, shared a stage with Al Gore and changed laws in almost a decade as an environmental activist and entrepreneur. She is also still only 20. "The youth voice is extremely powerful," says Reynolds, a speaker at this morning's youth climate strike in Miami Beach. "I hope our elected leaders realise that current young voters and soon-to-be voters care passionately about this issue and very much want to see something done about it." Reynolds is not afraid to play hardball to tackle the climate emergency. She is the lead plaintiff of eight young Floridians currently suing their state and its governor for "violating their fundamental rights to a stable climate system" through their reliance on fossil fuels. But she knows collaboration can work just as well as confrontation. As a teenager she was instrumental in getting the city of South Miami to adopt Florida's first law requiring solar panels on newly-built homes. "We also spoke at a Miami-Dade budget hearing and the same day after hearing the children speak the county created the post of chief resilience officer," she said. "The young generation is starting to realise our voice matters. Our leaders are going to have to pay attention if a bunch of kids stop going to school and start standing on their steps at city hall. They may not have a vote but they do have a voice." The climate strike is being held the same day as the two-year anniversary of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico and left nearly 3,000 people dead. In recognition of that event, the climate strike is happening in concert with a Puerto Rico Day of Action to highlight the struggles the island still faces in its effort to rebuild, while remaining vulnerable to the impact of climate change. Marisol Rivera, a 13-year-old Puerto Rican student in Brooklyn, has been speaking on Friday about Maria and how it impacted her family, She will connect the issues there to the climate crisis. Other Puerto Rican activists will also speak at the event, including Gustavo Rivera, a New York state senator (he is unrelated to Marisol). Puerto Rico is still recovering from the hurricane, which affected all of the 3.5 million Americans who lived on the island. Its power grid was knocked out completely by the storm and families reported having no electricity nearly a year after the hurricane. Here are some photographs of people gathering in New York's Foley Square. Donald Trump is set to attend the United Nations headquarters during Monday's key summit on the climate crisis - but will be there to take part in a meeting on religious freedom instead. A senior UN official confirmed to the Guardian that the White House has booked one of the large conference rooms in the New York headquarters on Monday so that the president can address a gathering on religious freedom. The move is likely to be seen as a blatant snub to the UN climate summit, to be held in the same building on the same day. Leaders from around the world, including the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson; France's president, Emmanuel Macron; and India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, are expected at the summit as part of a major UN push to heighten the response to the escalating climate crisis. UN sources said the booking of the room was relatively last minute and will cause some logistical issues given the major security operation that accompanies the US president wherever he goes. But a senior UN official said they were "not panicked" given the large organizational capacity of the UN general assembly. "No one was really expecting the president to come to the climate summit," the official said. It's understood that senior UN staff have realistic expectations of Trump and do not expect him to engage on the climate crisis, even for a summit held in his hometown. Trump has vowed the US will withdraw from the landmark Paris climate agreement. Many folks have come to New York from all over the world to attend today's strike, planning their trips months in advance. Our Village, a coalition made of indigenous groups and communities of color, spoke to reporters this morning, in a studio space in New York City where they were making signs and distributing T-shirts in anticipation of the march. Dinaman Tuxá, traveled from Bahia, Brazil with a delegation of six Brazillians from all over the country to speak out against the injustices against indigenous communities in Brazil. "We're going through a process of genoicde. ... President Bolsonaro, he's decimating hate against the indigenous populations of Brazil," Tuxá said through a translator. "Us, the indigenous people, we are the guardians of the forest. ... We need the world to recognize our contributions and help us protect our territories." Tuxá said that he traveled to New York because Brazillians aren't listening to the cry of indigenous communities in their country, so they're making an international cry in anticipation of the UN climate summit. The United Nations headquarters in New York will play host tonight to an immersive art installation by artist Joseph Michael that features images of an iceberg and six young advocates, including Greta Thunberg, addressing hopes and fears around the climate crisis. We have some pictures from last night's final rehearsal: We will be live through the rest of the day here in the US with Oliver Milman, Lauren Aratani and Ed Helmore reporting on the big rally in New York city. Emily Holden, meanwhile, is out with activists in Washington DC while Richard Luscombe is at the strikes in Miami Beach. Later on, Levi Pulkkinen in Seattle will be with more than 1,500 corporate Amazon workers expected to strike to highlight criticisms of the company's climate policies. CEO Jeff Bozos said on Thursday that Amazon would do more and pledged the firm would be carbon neutral by 2040. Susie Cagle, meanwhile, will be reporting on the strikes from the city of Richmond, California, and we'll also have a dispatch from Dom Phillips in Rio de Janeiro. All week, the Guardian has been part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of more than 250 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate emergency. Welcome from the Guardian's office in New York, where we are now anchoring live coverage of these calls for climate action, which have drawn huge crowds around the world. We expect the US will be staging its largest ever climate strike, with actions planned in more than 1,000 locations, including major rallies in New York, Washington DC, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco and Miami. Here at the Guardian's New York office, members of our team in midtown Manhattan walked out at midday local time to participate in the strike. Further downtown, Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg will be leading a big strike rally which she is expected to speak at later in the day, ahead of addressing the UN's Climate Action Summit next week. Activists are gathering in Foley Square, near City Hall, and will start marching south on Broadway at 1pm ET to rally in Battery park. There have already been significant protests across the world today with millions joining the climate strike to urge politicians and businesses to take action to avert the climate crisis. With parts of the US just waking up and others still asleep it's far from over so I'm handing over to my colleague Mark Oliver, who is taking over the blog and will keep you abreast of all the latest developments in the US and elsewhere. Back in the UK, the police monitoring group Netpol says that officers are restricting protesters in London by kettling them (for those unfamiliar with the British vernacular it means confining demonstrators in a small area) on the southside of Westminster Bridge. New York is standing up! The Rolling Stones legend Keith Richards has endorsed the climate strike, realising that Time is not actually On Our Side (sorry). The Guardian has partnered with Friends of the Earth to highlight the climate crisis and raise funds for the charity, which is doing so much to address the damage that has been done and continues to be done to the planet. Here is a country I'm not sure we've featured on the blog so far today. With the US protests beginning, it feels like a good time to highlight this article on the huge impact climate change could have on the nation if it is not arrested. The US is waking up (in more ways than one) and already there are sizeable crowds reported. Here is a useful reminder about the impact of flying. You can also calculate the impact of your next trip. Anuna De Wever, 18, a cofounder of Belgium's school strike movement, which has organised 20 nationwide strike days since January, said today's protest in Brussels made her feel hopeful. It was amazing, we had 20,000 across the streets. I am really happy about this strike because I feel like after coming on the streets after 20 weeks, this is our season two. There are so many people ready and it just makes me feel very hopeful. But she added: Belgium is doing really badly on the climate crisis. There is not any ambition from any of our politicians. So we are really asking them to take responsibility because right now we don't have a climate policy and they really need to take responsibility. While Belgium has signed the Paris Agreement, the three Belgian regions (Flanders, Brussels and Wallonia) have so far been unable to agree on the distribution of emissions cuts. De Wever thinks the school strike movement is helping to bridge these old political divides. There are some arguments, especially in politics but we don't care about that and we want to unite everyone to fight with us. I think it's beautiful that no one is thinking about this, are they from the Walloon side or are they from the Flemish side. The Brussels protest finished close to the headquarters of the European commission and European council - not an accidental choice as the EU debates decarbonising its economy by 2050. Earlier in the day, De Wever and other activists met the European commission vice president, Frans Timmermans, who has been tasked with drawing up a Green New Deal to allow the EU to move away from fossil fuel and meet its climate pledges. The bulk of those still taking part in the climate strike in London reached the entrance to Trafalgar Square a little earlier, where police blocked it off at Northumberland Avenue, to chants of "let them through". Many people are on their way home now. I was speaking at the back of the crowd to two new mothers, Chloe Reeves and Lauren Slattery, who had brought along their children, Leo (five months) and Phoenix (seven months). While deeply concerned about the climate crisis - to the extent that they have discussed jointly purchasing land on higher ground for children as a reaction to rising sea levels - they've been drawing some encouragement from the international focus of the strikes. "To be honest as a new mother I've been putting all my energy into the basic job of keeping baby alive and looking after him and I've purposefully not thought about climate change because it has freaked me out so much, but now my mother instincts have allowed me to shift a bit of emphasis on to things like this and the action that we need to take," said Chloe. Lauren added: "Actions like today have really been inspiring. We recycle and do as much as we can in our personal daily lives but you really realise that so much more needs to done, and we really are on a tight schedule." Nearly two-thirds (64%) of Generation Z Americans want to work for employers committed to tackling climate change, according to research released today from international non-profit organisation the Climate Group. It surveyed more than 1,000 16- to 24-year-olds across the US to find out their views on climate change and how it will affect their future choices. Three in four young people (77%) feel climate change is an important issue that needs to be solved, with almost identical results for Democratic and Republican states (80% v 76%). With the US federal government actively rolling back pro-climate policies, for most young people the bulk of responsibility to solve the climate crisis rests on the shoulders of big US businesses and state governments alike (60% for big businesses v 69% for state governments). Four out of five (80%) support US companies adopting renewable energy in place of fossil fuels, with two in five (40%) believing they should be using 100% clean energy already. Two-fifths think the switch needs to be made by 2030 at the latest. Within the transport sector, two-thirds (66%) of young people would support the replacement of short-haul flights with cleaner alternatives, such as high-speed rail. Helen Clarkson, CEO of the Climate Group, which annually hosts Climate Week NYC, said: We need wholescale changes to economies and infrastructure to make pro-climate choices the new normal. It is in the interests of every business and government to sit up and listen to the next generation of workers and voters. We know through our initiatives for business on renewables, electric vehicles, and smart efficient energy and work with state and regional governments that good progress is being made in the US, but more needs to be done at a greater pace and scale. Demonstrations, marches, even open-air classes on environmental policy are planned in more than 40 Brazilian cities on Friday. And while numbers are likely to range widely - from 186 people who signed up for the Facebook event of a protest at 5pm in the southern city of Florianópolis to 12,000 promising to attend another at 4pm on São Paulo's landmark Paulista Avenue, activists said the geographical spread of cities taking part shows how non-party, environmental activism is growing here. "We are talking to churches, unions, social movements," said Yumi Kawamura, 45, a sociologist helping organise the São Paulo event, "looking to unite organisations with different agendas and find a common way forward." In Rio de Janeiro, a protest at 10am outside the state legislature is aimed at children and young people. Another is scheduled for 2.30pm. Then at 4pm demonstrators hold an open-air class outside the headquarters of beleaguered environment agency Ibama - under attack from far-right president Jair Bolsonaro and his business-friendly environment minister, Ricardo Salles - before marching to the city centre. Events are being staged by the Rio Climate Coalition (Coalizão Pelo Clima Rio), an umbrella group of collectives. "It is very plural, it is horizontal, it is collective. It is aligned with the movement that Greta (Thunberg) started in Europe," said Hanna Cordeiro, 31, an advertising executive and climate activist from the coalition. Brazil is one of the world's deadliest countries for environmental defenders - one reason, Cordeiro said, why environmental demonstrations in Brazil are usually smaller here. Another is that pressing problems with poverty, crime, unemployment and a lack of basic sanitation obscure environmental issues for many Brazilians. "In Brazil it is jobs and housing. The environmental agenda is seen as more subjective. In Europe it is much stronger," said José Oeiras, 57, a climate organiser for the leftist Workers' party helping stage a demonstration at 4pm in the Amazon city of Belém. When the Amazon fires crisis exploded, Bolsonaro's supporters flooded social media and WhatsApp with fake news - a report by the Publica journalism agency showed how automated Twitter accounts led attacks. The propaganda deluge echoed Bolsonaro's unproven arguments that the blazes were started by foreign NGOs and foreign interest constituted an attack on Brazilian sovereignty. Such nationalist rhetoric has long resounded in the Amazon. "This is an old argument," Oeiras said. "It's a contradiction we need to overcome." Fatima Zara Alarakha, 20, a campaigner for Islamic Relief UK and an arts student, marching on Millbank beside the Houses of Parliament in central London, said fighting climate change was imperative, given her beliefs: I'm here today because it is my duty as Muslim and a human. Allah entrusted us to look after the earth and it is our responsibility to do so. I'm striking today to represent my family in Pakistan whose houses are being flooded as a result of our overconsumption in the west. I'm also here to represent the future generations whose lives will be affected by the decisions we make. I want to bring children up in a world where they don't have to suffer from majorly polluted air, decrepit housing and the health problems and poverty brought on by the climate crisis. Manisha Jeevan, 16, isn't sure she is ready for her music exam tomorrow. But she decided to skip school because climate change is more important, she says. "If there is no earth then how will we live?" She is protesting near Lodhi gardens, Delhi, with her friend, Kushi, also 16. They worry about pollution in Delhi, about the failure to manage waste properly and about the increasingly hot weather. "It's September. Our parents used to get winter in this month but we have not got winter. We are losing our seasons," says Kushi. Rishika Singh, 18, a college student, worries about the damage that Delhi's pollution is doing to her lungs. She says: I even bought a mask, but it's not so easy to wear every day. The pollution that we see here, and the water here which has a lot of chlorine in it - it's not good. It's the poorest who suffer the most.The rich are better off - they make the use of air conditioning and private cars for comfort. It's evening now in Delhi and, after an afternoon of chanting and banging drums, protesters have gone home. Nimrat Singh, 21, a law student, says people want action, not words, from their leaders. "We want the system to actually recognise climate change," she says. New York City is anticipated to see one of the largest climate strikes today. Thousands of people are expected at the protest, which is being co-hosted by over two dozen local and national groups. Protesters plan to gather at a park outside New York's City Hall and march a mile down to Battery Park, where Greta Thunberg is scheduled to speak in the afternoon along with other performers and speakers. In anticipation of the strikes, NYC's Department of Education announced the absences of students in the district, the largest school district in the nation, will be excused on Friday with parental permission. In other words, 1.1 million students have been given the green light to attend the strikes if they want to. Many students have spent the last few weeks painting signs and banners in preparation. Before the march's official start at noon local time (5pm BST), a rally honoring the two-year anniversary of Hurricane Maria will take place in downtown Manhattan. The central London rally, outside parliament, has heard speeches from Jeremy Corbyn and Caroline Lucas, with the Labour leader calling for tougher global environmental standards to prevent the import of products made overseas using harmful processes. From an open-top double-decker bus being used a stage, Corbyn told the crowd: So when we measure the effects of climate change emissions, let's measure those emissions at the source, where they are created, and not put ourselves in some comfort zone, that we're doing OK at the expense of somebody else. Corbyn also called for what Labour term a "green industrial revolution" - a version of the green new deal - to invest heavily in areas such as sustainable energy. That green industrial revolution can bring about, I believe, 400,000 decent, high-quality jobs. And with that we also have cleaner air, we have better quality of life, and we deal with many of the health inequalities that exist in this country. Beforehand, Lucas began by noting that in May parliament had passed a motion declaring a climate emergency. "So don't ever let anyone tell you that you are not making a difference," the Green MP told the crowd. "You are making history." Calling it "the biggest social justice issue of our time", Lucas said the government needed to make more urgent plans than the commitment of net zero carbon emissions by 2050. She said: The truth is that a climate target of net zero by 2050 is not climate leadership. When your house is on fire you don't call 999 and ask for a fire engine in 30 years' time. You want urgent action now. This is a striking picture, no pun intended, from Berlin. The translation of the sign held by "Merkel" reads: "Mother (Merkel) has failed, now it's the turn of young people." The Bishop of Wolverhampton, Clive Gregory, has asked all clergy members and lay employees within the Dioceses of Lichfield to set aside their usual duties today to focus instead on Climate Action activities. Gregory led a special service at Lichfield Cathedral to raise awareness about the climate crisis. Around 550 pupils and teachers from five West Midlands primary schools attended. Children from St Michael's CE primary school in Lichfield arrived holding handmade signs and chanting "save our world". My colleague, Ben Quinn, is in Westminster where climate strikers are heading towards Downing Street, but there is also a counter-demonstration by Jeremy Corbyn's brother, and famed climate change denier, Piers. The German government today announced a new climate protection package costing (EURO)50bn, which was immediately criticised as lacking ambition by Fridays for Future protesters. At a press conference in central Berlin, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said that as a scientist she had been impressed by Greta Thunberg's motto "unite behind the science". Following a marathon negotiation session, Merkel's conservatives and her Social Democrat coalition partner detailed plans for increased purchase premiers for electric cars, and new taxes for traditional cars with emissions over 115mg. The measures include a ban on installing oil-fired heating in buildings from 2025, with a subsidy for householders prepared to switch to more climate-friendly alternatives. A price for emissions of carbon dioxide has also been agreed that will take effect via trading in emissions certificates. The package also includes new investment in rail networks, and promises of reduced fares. In a tweet, Fridays for Future criticised the plans: Dear government: if you spend years doing nothing for climate protection and then, after months of massive public pressure, discuss measures that have nothing to do with [the plan to halt global warming at] 1.5C, then that's not a 'breakthrough' but a scandal. You can see some of the best pictures of the day here: Thanks for the excellent questions, which have ranged from science and politics to a plea from a deskbound worker - hang in there! - and thanks to you all for taking part in the debate over climate issues and solutions. Today's climate strikes have sent a message round the world that will be heard in the highest echelons of politics and business, but which have also helped to spur public engagement with the solutions to the crisis that will be needed if we are to make the vast changes we must to avoid the worst ravages of climate chaos. On a personal note, today is almost exactly 15 years since I started writing full-time about the climate crisis, and related environmental issues, and although progress in that time has been grindingly slow in many ways, it has also been marked by sudden leaps forward. Improving public understanding and engagement is at the heart of making a better future. The messages from today are clear. This is not somebody else's problem: it is ours. This is not a problem for the future: it is now. This is not an inevitable catastrophe: we can still make things much better. A noisy and good natured protest is being held in Bedford, with a few hundred protesters, including one dressed as a giant dinosaur, marching along the High Street at lunchtime shouting "what do we want, climate justice", "no planet B" and "this is what democracy looks like". The protest is being led by children from local schools, clearly drawing their inspiration from climate activist Greta Thunberg. Earlier, Bedford's MP, Mohammad Yasin, addressed the crowd, saying he was sorry that politicians had let people down and pledging his support. One young protester addressing the crowd said: "We may only be 14 or 15 years old but we're a force to be reckoned with." Later, a die-in was held in Harpur Square in Bedford town centre. Indy Willaert, Liza, Fran Demeyer and Jana Bameils, all aged 13, have taken half a day off school to attend the climate march in Brussels. Not all their teachers are in favour. "Some of them are alright with it, but some of them would rather have us in class," says Fran, who has already taken part in several school strikes. "That climate is more important... You can always do [your work] after school," adds Indy. Liza wants politicians to help make green choices easier, including reducing plastic waste. "We can only buy plastic because everything is in plastic. We want them to help us" They all agree with Jana that politicians are not doing enough. The four schoolgirls arrived from their home city of Ghent to join the climate march in Brussels, which started from the city's North Station and will finish around the headquarters of the European Union. Along the route there was music, drum beating and chanting. Young people jumped up and down to the slogan: "Plus chaud, plus chaud, plus chaud que le climat" (Hotter, hotter, hotter than the climate). Stijn, a 28-year-old engineer, was missing work to join the protest. His employers "were not very happy about it but they couldn't really make a fuss about it either," he said. "Like the other side of my sign says there are no jobs on a dead planet so it is important to be here today." His friend, Deniz Malat, 27, a recent plant biology graduate, feels people are being ignored by the government. "We want change and we are being ignored by the government - the politicians. We want to come together to show we are serious and they should consider what we are saying here." People are also out in force in Poland. Ten-year-old Nellie Jacobs and her mother, Helen, had never protested before their hometown of Whaley Bridge made national headlines earlier this month. Nellie and her Dad were choosing books in the library of their quiet Derbyshire town when Helen called them in a panic to say its dam had burst and the whole neighbourhood could go under. Carrying a homemade placard saying "School strike for climate", Nellie was allowed to take the day off school at Whaley Bridge primary to join the global strike in Manchester. She said: Everyone had to be evacuated and we raced for high ground. I was quite scared because we weren't expecting it. We occasionally get police cars coming through Whaley for something that's not in Whaley but we've not had crises in Whaley. I'm worried it might happen again. We weren't used to that much rain so it made me worry and it made me think all this rain, we don't get it usually so I thought that it was climate change that caused the rain. Her mother Helen Jacobs said she had never protested in her life but felt infuriated by the inaction of global leaders. She said: It's kind of getting the politicians to realise that they've made a mistake in saying that it's really nothing when it's a really big problem and we need to act on it now. I thought if I got out here and did something then it might happen. It's been building up a lot in my mind. The climate is under threat and it has been for a long time but the action doesn't seem to have fit the imperative. We feel like we need to wake the government up, we need to wake world leaders up and make them realise that we need systematic massive change. We're here and ready for change to bring the temperature down. We feel like we need to shake them by the collar to make them realise. The scientists are there telling them and still President Trump is denying climate change exists! Other leaders need to grab him, shake him, and get him on board. The whole world needs to get on this. In Aviemore, a town in the Cairngorms National Park, in the Scottish Highlands, strikes are taking place. We were sent another photograph of activity there today from Iain Gibson. Nick from Norwich asked: How can I join in the strike in a non-unionised office where no one cares about climate change without getting the sack? That is a tough one. Most companies will be affected by climate chaos in some way, however: extreme weather events are already costing billions a year and those costs are not coming down soon. Foresighted companies will audit the risks they face and act to deal with them. If you work for a publicly listed company, you could try buying some shares and turning up at the AGM to ask questions about how they are dealing with climate risk. If you don't, more of your co-workers may be interested in the climate than you think: polls show a great majority of people in most countries are concerned about the climate crisis. Dan from Tunbridge Wells asked: How will we make our nuclear power plants safe if this civilisation collapses? How does the hydrological cycle fit in? Can regenerative agriculture help? Regenerative agriculture can help, and sustainable agriculture can reduce emissions, aid carbon storage and feed the world more healthily, as recent reports by the Lancet and WRI, among others, have shown. As for hydrology, the effects of climate chaos are likely to be the wet areas of the world getting wetter and the dry areas getting drier, which is problematic. And as for nuclear power, some people - including the Guardian's George Monbiot - see it as an uncomfortable but perhaps necessary way out of the climate crisis, but the very long-term storage of nuclear waste is a problem still to be solved. Kee from London asked: How much impact do long-haul flights have? How does the impact compare with, say, driving a car, or using electrical household appliances every day? My colleague Niko Kommenda recently published an excellent calculator showing what impact flights have. Whether you can offset the emissions from such flights by cutting carbon in other aspects depends on how many flights you take and where to. Niko from Germany asked: What is your estimate on how much renewables capacity Europe needs to build to meet its climate targets? My rough guess is between 30-40 GW per year, that would equal about 600 wind turbines per month, that's quite a challenge (other forms of renewables are of course available). The International Energy Agency and the European Environment Agency are the best sources. Stephen from Cheshire asked: Whatever happened to the plant a tree in '73 campaigns I grew up with in the 1970s? Surely now is a good time to kickstart this again with planting in every public space and private garden. Fruit trees also feed us and wildlife. I have planted hundreds of trees over the years. Ultimately, however, the planet is simply overcrowded. My wife and I chose to be child free so we've done our bit... I love the plant a tree in 73 campaign as I used to have some of the stickers! Planting trees is part of the UK government response but so far targets have been missed. Today my colleague Rowena Mason reports on an NHS tree planting campaign. Thousands of French youngsters skipped school to march through Paris. Claude Guyon, a cinema decorator and sculptor, was dressed as a Brazilian tribal leader and carried a "sacred rattle". He said: I'm here to represent the guardians of the Earth from north and South America. The tribal leader, who is a woman, gave me this headdress so I could be here today as an ambassador for her. Primary school headteacher Scott McFarlane took the morning off work to attend the Middlesborough climate strike with his wife, who is also a teacher, and his nine-year-old son, who is a pupil at his school. During the strike, dozens of protesters staged a "die in" in the North Yorkshire town's Centre Square - lying on the pavement for seven minutes to illustrate the rate at which it is believed species are becoming extinct. McFarlane allowed other children at Stokesley primary academy to take part in the strikes if they wished, giving them an "education other than at school" mark on the register. While not many took up the offer, he said the fact that so many young people seemed to be engaged with environmental activism had given him hope. "I think Greta Thunberg's an absolute idol. We've got kids at school who last year were coming dressed as Ariana Grande, but have now changed their hairstyles to look like Greta," said McFarlane. McFarlane, who is a member of Extinction Rebellion Teesside, said he and his son would be striking from the school next month for XR's October Rebellion in London. "I am genuinely scared for the future of the human race. Not in the distant future but soon. We have to act," he said. "If there's any further action like today, I will always let children have the day off. Not everybody agrees and I'm not asking them to, really. But I hope our example is one that people are starting to take on board." Of all the venues globally that will host climate strike protests today, none can surpass Miami Beach for poignancy. Florida's poster-city for sea level rise will sink under seven feet of water by the end of the century, if scientists' predictions are realised, and already it takes only a high tide and a rainy day to send floodwaters surging inland. These dark clouds are why student climate activists from all over South Florida will gather at Miami Beach city hall this morning to reinforce their message that more needs to be done. At the most recent youth strike in May, barely four dozen waved placards and called for action - but today students will walk out of their South Florida schools and assemble there in their hundreds to highlight the urgency of the moment. Gabriella Marchesani, a Miami high school senior and an organiser of today's rally: We're told by the adults, 'what you're doing is a good thing, keep up the great work'. But it shouldn't be just 'oh, keep doing what you're doing', it should be 'let me see what I can do to help you. How can I be a climate voter? How can I switch my lifestyle to be more sustainable? How can I lower my carbon footprint?' She adds: We want this to be that historic moment that we look back on and say that was the day we got it changed. That was the day we were able to make people hear us, and create legislation and address this crisis. Andreu from Valencia, Spain asked: According to scientists, the "natural evolution" of the sun will lead to major climate change here on the Earth. So, what role, if any, does solar activity (solar winds, solar flares, sunspots) play in climate change right now? Are we missing something, have we miscalculated or does the sun have nothing to do with climate change at this point? Changes in the sun's activity are not causing the climate change and global heating we are currently experiencing. They are caused by human actions, chiefly burning fossil fuels and changing land use, as successive reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have conclusively shown. Alex from Warwickshire asked: The electrification of small vehicles is seen as an achievable near-term step towards cutting emissions, but to replace a significant fraction of the current fossil-fuelled fleet would presumably require a drastic increase in the global extraction and use of 'rare-earth' metals for battery manufacture. How well do we currently understand the environmental impact of such a change and are there more sustainable battery technologies on the horizon? In the long term, availability of rare earths will be an important issue but it is equally important to note that there are no serious current supply problems as the manufacturing rates show. Batteries are one of the biggest areas of research and there are multiple avenues being explored, from nanotechnology to graphene and even aluminium, a common metal, as an alternative. Hydrogen fuel cells are another possibility. Tracey from Ross-on-Wye asked: Guy McPherson, an environmental scientist, argues that, due to the protection from the sun's heat attributable to global dimming, if we cut carbon emissions the Earth will heat faster, and the planet will be uninhabitable for any species within a decade. Why is this theory not spoken about or even mentioned by any other leading environmental voices? Because it is wrong. The dimming of light from the sun owing to aerosols does have a small effect, but as you seem to be pointing out, many of the aerosols are soot, or black carbon. Black carbon actually adds to warming, especially when it falls on snow. Removing black carbon and other short-lived climate pollutants could reduce temperatures by as much as 0.5C as work by Durwood Zaelke and others has clearly shown. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find. Lyra Harris, six, from Islington, London, protesting outside 10 Downing Street, said: Stop this nonsense. Our Earth is getting too hot. We have to act now for everyone. It's not just for humans, climate change harms the animals too. Over in Greece it is pupils who have been leading protests with hundreds pouring into Athens' main plaza, Syntaga square. Ariadni, 15, holding a hand-drawn placard of a weeping planet under a halo of heat said: I am here to raise awareness. There's not much time left. This is global. People need to be informed and they need to act now. Maria Makarem, the 16-year-old who had helped organise the strike said the protesters had ended up in front of the parliament to ram home the message that urgent times call for urgent measures. "They have to understand, all the politicians in there, that we are the new generation and we want change," she said, her own placard proclaiming: "Our world, our future, our choice." Yiannis Marangakis and Foivos Anastadiades, both aged 10 and both taken out of class by their mothers Daniella and Myrtia to attend the protest, had an even simpler message: "The earth is very important to us. We have to save it." This shows the scale of the march in Edinburgh: Ian Mantgani, 36, is striking in London today. He says: We have to put pressure on our employers, MPs and friends. We need a new power grid and electric cars on the road or we're toast. Keep pressuring those in power for concrete change and keep pressuring them when they give you mealy mouthed answers. I believe that's the best way forward for change." Chris from South Africa asked: Why are we not seeing a rise in sea levels? Could it perhaps partly be due to the fact that rainfall across the SAHEL region that is rapidly greening is 40m olympic swimming pools up on a few years ago? We are seeing a rise in sea levels. And sea levels alone are not the biggest problem: storm and tidal surges are much worse when sea levels are even slightly higher, with the power to overtop our sea defences. Desertification is increasing in many parts of Africa, with climate change one of the reasons but not the only one (overgrazing and land use changes also play a major role). Artur from Crewe asked: Are we prepared to do real things to tackle climate change? We can say do this or do that but our use of social media takes significant resources. The cheap food, cheap technology, new mobiles released every year is driven by customers not the other way around so how many are actually genuinely prepared to change their way of life? People are increasingly understanding that lifestyle changes are necessary, from veganism and flexitarian diets to changing our travel habits. Renewable energy such as wind and solar is already cheaper or on a par with fossil fuels in many areas, and its deployment is increasing fast. A Guardian reader from London who wanted to remain anonymous asked: How democratic is it that a secondary school threatens their pupils with being expelled if they participate in today's strike? How are we teaching 'British values' to our kids if in their school are not allowed to protest for something that fully impacts their future? What will it be next? Forbid them to participate in any human rights support act? Schools will make their own judgment, but engaging children with a subject of huge importance in scientific, political and historical terms might strike many teachers as a great opportunity. The climate emergency relates to chemistry, physics, biology, geography, history, social studies - you could probably even fit it into a load of other lessons too. Why not see this as an opportunity to engage pupils rather than turn them off? Derek from West Sussex asked: The UK has a good record of deploying offshore wind generation. What I don't understand is why we aren't deploying wave power and tidal power generation? We have the most coastline per head of any major European country. Wave power never stops, unlike wind, it is more energy dense than wind, and it could have other benefits like reducing coastal erosion. Tidal power solutions likewise are always available and energy dense. There is an ecological cost in habitats but a balance is needed here. Do we really think that the ecological cost of a tidal barrier is worse than a nuclear power station? There is an ecological cost to farmland too, but we need to eat, so we cut down all the forests we had in medieval times to make room for agriculture. We just need to make some room for power generation too. The UK is a world leader on offshore wind, as the latest green power auctions show. Wave and tidal power have proved more difficult, in the latter case partly owing to the changes that would be required to landscape a tidal lagoon. But as public subsidy is less needed for wind and solar as prices have come down, it might become possible to spend more of it on wave and tidal power - they may prove cheaper than the high costs agreed to by the government for nuclear energy. The mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, received a warm applause at the city's climate protest when he gave a speech pledging that "fracking is the past, it is not the future" - but by far the biggest cheers went to a 10-year-old girl called Lillia who took to the stage next. The local schoolgirl, with a high-pitched Mancunian accent and fluorescent ear-defenders tied to her backpack, gave a rousing speech taking aim at politicians for their "lies" - before turning directly to Burnham. Lies, when you don't count the airport in the emission figures! Lies, when we have 1,200 air pollution related deaths in Manchester just last year - but they plan to build a huge car park right next door to a school in Ancoats. Lies when the pension funds of Manchester are still investing £1.4bn in fossil fuel companies ... Lies, in April the mayor Andy Burnham, when I asked if he would support us. I asked for more than publicity stunt pictures. Where's the action? To huge cheers, she continued: Today I woke up to the images around the world of a million people striking and my heart lifted because I knew we weren't alone in our fight. Thank you for coming out to support us. Thank you for having the courage to fight for our future! To adults I say, you have the power to vote you need to keep amplifying our voices. We the youth cannot wait until we are old enough - we need action now. Numbers at Berlin's Klimastreik have reached 100,000, it has just been announced. Carola Rackete, the SeaWatch Captain who was arrested in Italy several weeks ago addressed Berlin's Klimastreik, to huge applause. She told them: We adults are responsible for the fact that the Earth is dying... we should not be under the illusion that our individual actions can... turn the situation around. She paid tribute to "the children and young people who have campaigned tirelessly for over a year... and managed to get this issue to the top of the political agenda". She said temperatures could be expected to rise by 4-6C by the end of the century. Extinction Rebellion, to which she belongs, was telling the truth when it predicted the collapse of human civilisation as a result. We can no longer stop global heating, she said, "it's too late", but we can "reduce greenhouse gases with immediate effect". Sarah from Cardiff asked: What are the advantages people will see and experience through the changes we need to make due to climate change? For example, I believe cycling rather than driving will make people healthier, shopping locally rather than online increases daily interactions. Do you envisage the activists and media managing to put this side of the crisis across? Cleaning up greenhouse gases has myriad beneficial side effects, including cleaner air as diesel and petrol cars are taken off the roads in favour of electric vehicles, public transport and walking or cycling. Our knowledge of the harms of air pollution has expanded dramatically in the past few years: we now know air pollutants can be found in all human organs, and it is linked not only to respiratory problems and heart disease but also dementia, developmental problems and miscarriage. In some ways, the cleaning up of air pollution is easier to explain than climate chaos because people can see and feel air pollution more clearly than the link between invisible carbon dioxide and extreme weather, and increasingly air pollution campaigners are making the link with climate benefits from moving away from coal and diesel in particular. Louis from London asked: Today is wonderful to see - the energy and passion - but how can you be sure we haven't left it too late ? There is a climate doomosphere - I'm thinking Paul Beckwith, Peter Wadhams and others who suggest overwhelming events in the next decade or two. Can they be dismissed as fringe cranks? Climate change is a problem for today, not the distant future, and the effects are already being seen, as we have extensively reported. But there is still time to stave off the worst effects if we take action on emissions now. The IPCC has said emissions must be effectively zero by around mid-century to hold the world to no more than 1.5C of warning, and every effort to bring down emissions helps towards that goal. But there are scary things we know less about: tipping points, which could cause runaway heating to take hold. These include Arctic sea ice melt, which reveals dark sea instead of reflective ice, creating more warming, and the melting permafrost that releases methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, in a vicious circle. Some have suggested we turn our efforts to adapting to climate change instead of cutting emissions. But adapting without cutting emissions is like trying to mop up an overflowing sink with the taps still running. The truth is we need to do both, and urgently. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find. Just to stand back from the breathless enthusiasm of the protests for a moment, our environment editor, Damian Carrington, has been pulling out a series of charts that highlight the scale of the challenge - and the beginnings of some solutions. Perhaps the most important one is this: the planet's average temperature started a steady climb two centuries ago, but has rocketed since the second world war as consumption and population has risen. Global heating means there is more energy in the atmosphere, making extreme weather events more frequent and more intense. We have also tried to capture this alarming rise in temperatures in a startling piece of music. Alas, it is not a banger, so is unlikely to become a global anthem for the Friday strikes movement. But it's not all gloom and doom. The three charts below show the progress we have made, in renewable energy generation, electric vehicle production, and battery development. Today's climate strikes highlight a crucial fact: that our actions in the next few years will decide the world's future, and whether we can avoid the worst ravages of global heating or succumb to climate chaos. We must effectively eliminate greenhouse gas emissions, and nurture the natural world enough to absorb the remainder, by mid-century to avoid a future of catastrophic and irreversible climate chaos. Extreme weather is already driving 2 million people a week to seek humanitarian aid, and that is set to rise to 150 million in the next decade alone. The Guardian will try to answer your questions on the climate strikes and the forces shaping them. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find. Guardian environment journalist Fiona Harvey will be on hand to answer any questions you have about the climate crisis between 1.30pm and 2.30pm BST. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find. The US is set to stage its largest ever day of protest over the climate crisis, with tens of thousands of students set to be joined by adults in abandoning schools and workplaces for a wave of strikes across the country. Climate strikes will take place in more than 1,000 locations, with major rallies in New York, Washington DC, Boston, Chicago, San Francisco and Miami. The young strikers' totemic figure, Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, will take part in the New York walkout and will speak to massed protesters in Manhattan. Authorities in New York City have announced that its student population of 1.1 million is allowed to skip school in order to attend the strikes. Dozens of companies, including Patagonia and Ben and Jerry's, will support striking staff, with major unions also backing the walkouts. Dulce Belen Ceballos Arias, an 18-year-old from San Francisco, said she will be striking because "I want children of my own and I want them to have a better life than me. I don't want that to be taken away by climate change." Students in Boston will also be excused school, with a crowd of 10,000 expected to assemble. "We are excited to disrupt business as usual, to demand a Green New Deal," said Audrey Maurine Xin Lin, an 18-year-old organizer in Boston, in reference to the resolution put forward by progressive Democrats to enact a second world war-style mobilization to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions. A big difference on today's march in London is the presence of trade union activists alongside young people and their parents, writes Guardian environment correspondent Matthew Taylor, Graham Petersen, from the UCU lecturers' union and member of the green jobs alliance, said unions had to take a lead in the climate fight. This is going to be the defining issue for future generations and if we are not involved now how are we going to be relevant to the young people here today when they go into work. Trade unions around the world are backing today's protests and Petersen said it was "about time" they engaged in the climate crisis. In the UK it is difficult because people have their hands full with austerity and precarious jobs but unions are starting to realise that if we get the climate justice policies right we can tackle not just the climate but also a wider social justice issues. Lois Borny has been speaking to young people on the London march, including student Noemie, who told her: It's depressing knowing you're waking up to not such a bright future. The climate crisis has always been in the back of my mind, but I always used to be a bit of a pessimist... now that the movement has gained traction you get the feeling that you can change something. When asked what she thinks about the fact children are leading the movement she says: It almost seems like a game for them [the politicians]. They aren't taking it seriously. This isn't for fun or just for the sake of it. It's real and urgent. It is Nazreen's first day in London, having arrived from Malaysia yesterday. The 22-year-old, who is studying political philosophy, said: I'm happy this is happening because at home we have a big haze problem, because of forests being burned in Borneo. Nazreen says that if we were in Borneo, from where we are standing (by the stage) the Houses of Parliament would be unrecognisable from the haze. Borneo is burning. It has one of the oldest rainforest in the world and half of it is gone. We are really proud of our rainforests, but what is there to be proud of when it is gone? He says that it is good children are leading the movement, because it is allowing them to see "what is happening in the real world". A small but noisy crowd gathered in the financial district of Sandton in Johannesburg, outside the offices of Sasol, a huge South African energy and chemical company. Natalie Kapsosideris, 16, said: We don't really have a way out of this. The future looks really dismal at this point. There's not going to be a lot of food available, there will be droughts, floods, natural disasters. The fact that Sasol gets away with stealing our future from us... and it's all because they want to make money. Tariro Banganayi, 18, a student at Sacred Heart college, said: It's important that I lend my voice to this cause... a lot of people who aren't as privileged as I am don't have the opportunity to speak out against these sorts of issues, who live where the air is unbreathable, where toxic waste is dumped in rivers, those people don't have a voice to speak out... Also I am here to educate people about these issues and to get as much information from as many different places as I can... I am going to try to diversify the way that I raise awareness... I am going to use my social media a lot more effectively, I am going to centre my conversations with my friends, I am going to bring it up at the dinner table with my family... because if every person tells one person then we can tell everybody. Crowds of students in Delhi are blocking the road near to Lodhi Gardens, chanting: "What do we want? Climate justice." "You can't run away from climate change," reads one sign. Delhi is one of 21 cities predicted to run out of groundwater by 2020, according to the Indian government's policy thinktank, Niti Aayog. It is also one of the most polluted cities in the world."The lungs of an 11 year old have black spots on them," Shivam, a law student, says. "This is why we have to change things now." In Exeter, the protest is in full swing. Leon Hayton-Twigg, 11, (pictured below with his brother Lucas and his friend Ossian Finn, 10) says: "We have come here to show the people there's a problem and we want it to stop." More of the protest signs from the Exeter strikes... Archie Graham, 15, and his friends were supposed to be in school today but felt compelled to join Manchester's climate strike, while still rocking their school ties. He said: What's the point in going to school if we can't use that knowledge in the future because there won't be a future for us. His friend, Sam Pembroke, added: It's really important because there's no second chance - this is the only chance we have. If this carries on it's just going to end. Their friend, Santana Daza, 15, said they might get in trouble for bunking off school but it was worth it: I think it definitely does make a difference. They encourage us to learn about it but we all know about climate change - we don't need to be educated about it, it's more about taking action. Herding a group of six placard-carrying children, Kitty Rostron, 40, said her seven-year-old daughter Margot watches Greta Thunberg on YouTube and asks: Why is this happening? Why is Boris Johnson not doing anything? Why do people not make good decisions about climate change? Her friend Karine Joshua, 39, said it was important to bring children along so they understand what is happening to the environment: There's a real crisis right now, not in 10, 20 years time. Action is needed now so we're trying to teach them if we come together and show our support hopefully we can make a change. Here is a selection of images from other climate strikers: Hello, this is Haroon Siddique taking over from Sarah. The video below shows a small proportion of the staff who walked out at the Guardian. If you want to get in touch, please tweet me @Haroon_Siddique The Guardian live blog will be closing from noon (12:00 BST) until 12.30 BST as we are participating in a solidarity strike. When it resumes, my colleague Haroon Siddique will be taking over. In an email to staff explaining why we are walking out for 30 minutes, Guardian editor in chief, Katharine Viner, said: We fully support this global campaign, and we want colleagues to feel able to show solidarity with campaigners - so we are happy to support this activity across the organisation. Sadiq Khan is not the only mayor who has come out strongly behind today's strikes. The leaders of Paris, New York City, Los Angeles and Copenhagen released a strongly worded joint statement overnight. Our shared planet is facing a climate emergency. The science is clear that, without urgent action, sea levels will rise further, extreme temperatures will become the norm and climate-related disasters will inflict even greater damage. We are making historic investments to prepare and adapt our cities to the inevitable consequences of emissions already released into the atmosphere. When your house is on fire, somebody needs to sound the alarm. Young people in our cities, displaying incredible maturity and dignity are doing just that. School children are taking to the streets, drawing attention to the terrifying threat that climate breakdown poses to their future. Young people recognise just how unfair climate change is. Those who have generated the least greenhouse gas emissions, including the poorest, most disadvantaged and youngest in society, will suffer the worst effects of a rapidly changing global climate. They are right to sound the alarm, and they are right to demand action that tackles climate change and inequality simultaneously. On September 20, these inspiring young leaders have called for adults to join them for a Global Climate Strike. We have an opportunity to show, not only that we hear their message, but that they have inspired us to act even faster. As mayors, our greatest responsibility is to protect the lives and wellbeing of those that live in our cities. As adults, our obligation is to leave the world in a better state for our children than we inherited it. Fortunately, the evidence is increasingly clear that transforming our cities to prevent the climate crisis will also make them healthier, more equitable, safer and ultimately better places to live. The cities of the future will enjoy affordable and reliable public transport; the air will be free from poisonous toxins; buildings will generate zero emissions thanks to ultra-high efficient heating, cooling and insulation; waste will be recycled or reused, and all of this will be powered by abundant renewable energy. We have a unique opportunity to bestow a bright and hopeful legacy to the next generation. This is the future we want. That is why we are supporting the Global Climate Strikes. Mayors around the world, working through C40 Cities, are committed to deliver on the Paris Agreement and taking action to peak their emissions as our cities already have and bring them down sharply by 2030. Many businesses, investors, labour groups, faith leaders and local communities share our urgency. But we cannot tackle the climate crisis alone. We need science-based action from every sector of the economy, and we expect greater leadership from nation states. Young people are telling us that the climate emergency demands an emergency response. We couldn't agree more. It was signed by the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, as well as the mayor of Los Angeles, Eric Garcetti, and the lord mayor of Copenhagen, Frank Jensen. Lovely thread by Mary Hamilton on what to do if you cannot make the strikes today but still want to make an effort to reduce your waste. Ruby, 10, and Dougie, 7, (pictured below), were the first to start striking outside the Scottish parliament, back on a cold dark 11 January. Back then it was just them and the police. Seeing how big the movement has become, Ruby says she feels "happy and proud". "Amazing," says Dougie. Staff at the Guardian will be striking today at noon, so there will be no posts on the live blog between 12:00 BST and 12:30 BST. The fashion industry is a fossil-fuel-guzzling operation, as many of our clothes are made from petroleum-based textiles such as polyester. Even natural fibres such as cotton have a huge carbon footprint and require a large portion of the world's pesticides. In a bid to solve this disastrous environmental equation, scientists and designers are creating completely new textiles from fast-growing, carbon-sucking organisms such as micro- and macro-algae, mycelium (elements of fungus), bacteria and fermented yeast. These new biotechnologies efficiently convert sunlight and CO2 into mass raw materials, suck carbon out of the atmosphere and pave the way to a carbon-negative wardrobe. Tens of thousands of young people and adults are already streaming into the streets around Westminster in central London, and organisers say the protest, which was formally due to start at 11am, already dwarfs previous school strike demonstrations. Among those gathered in the sunshine were a group of medics. Isobel Braithwaite, a public health doctor from London, said they were there because the climate crisis was also a health crisis: "From heatwaves to floods; food shortages to devastating storms, these things are having a huge impact on health now and it is going to get worse." She said it was time adults listened to young people who had taken the lead in addressing this crisis. "We need urgent widespread action and it must happen quickly... we are running out of time." Glorious scenes in Edinburgh as thousands of children, parents, students and musicians gather at the Meadows for the Climate Strike. "This is our Earth and our future. We need to take care of it," said 11-year-old Leila Koita, pictured here with friends Eilidh Tedesco, Norah Turner, Tilly Torrie, Megan Berger and Nan Zhang. Norah's mum, Jo Spencely, says she hasn't been on a demo for decades but she is here to show support. "I'm massively concerned about their future. I almost can't bear to read about the climate. It's so scary." The march sets off at 11:30am and will pass through Edinburgh city centre and end with a rally in front of the Scottish parliament. As in London, police have imposed restrictions, in this case by refusing permission for the marchers to walk down Princes Street. As elsewhere, this is just the start of a week of climate action. On Saturday, activists will stage a "die in", Monday will be a "day of disruption", musicians will join a "Love the Planet festival" on Wednesday, and there'll be another rally outside parliament the following day. Even Emmeline Pankhurst has joined in the protests in Manchester. A statue of the suffragette hero has donned a bright orange lifejacket and has a placard that asks: "Ready for rising sea levels to reach this height?" The stunt was the idea of Katie Bradshaw and Ryan Griffiths, both 31, who described themselves as first-protesters who felt the need to act today. "Emmeline still carries that Mancunian spirit of standing up for what she believes in and great causes," said Griffiths. "Climate change is so important and we think it's an issue she would be at the forefront of if she were around today." Bradshaw added: "We've got to do our bit, even if it's just putting some signs up and making people realise we need to look after our planet. If she was around today she'd be supporting it." Friends of the Earth, an international network of environmental organisations in 74 countries, is calling on people across Britain to join young people in striking against climate change. Muna Suleiman, a Friends of the Earth campaigner, said: Most of us want to fix the climate crisis. And it can be done. But we need our politicians to act. Climate breakdown is already hurting people around the world, with many of those who have contributed least to the crisis being subjected to the harshest impacts. "And right when we need our leaders to step up, they continue to let us down. From filling the skies with more planes, to backing fracking in the UK and funding oil and gas projects abroad. "That's why we're standing shoulder to shoulder with young people to call on our politicians to deliver emergency climate action now. And we're asking everyone to join us." Bob Dylan's Blowin' in the Wind kicks off Berlin's "Klimastreik" to huge cheers from the thousands gathered, although no official estimates of the numbers attending are available yet. Contender for banner of the day is: 'Grandpa what is a snowman?' Hundreds of people are streaming through the portals of the Brandenburg Gate, through the Tiergarten Park and from every direction onto Platz des 18. März. Lots of Berlin's young are here with the blessing of their parents and teachers, though many have defied their schools to be here. At 1pm, the student strikers are planning to let off alarm clocks across the UK, and are encouraging businesses to set off their fire alarms at the same time in support. Jake Woodier, the campaign co-ordinator at UK Student Climate Network, said: "Young people across the world have taken the lead in highlighting the need for urgent climate action over the past year. "They are calling for adults to join them for the global climate strike, just three days before the UN climate action summit to pressure our governments to act to tackle the climate crisis. "Raise the Alarm will help draw attention to the climate emergency in workplaces across the breadth of the UK," Woodier said. Students at Torquay Girls' Grammar school have made a video about climate change. What's the carbon footprint of my trip? The square outside Manchester's grand central library has been taken over by a sea of people carrying homemade placards and chanting. Hundreds of those gathered sang "Whose planet? Our planet!" with scores of children among the protesters. Nellie Jacobs, 10, and her mother Helen said they were motivated to take part in the global climate strike after their hometown Whaley Bridge was evacuated earlier this month when it was deluged with months-worth of rain in a short period, causing a dam to burst and dozens of properties to flood. Nice cartoon just in from reader Jesse Leonard. You get the picture, literally. Possibly the first time the climate crisis has been likened to a purple piano, but why not? If there are any other artists out there with climate emergency sketches/drawings/cartoons, send them in via this link. The Kichwa tribe in the Sarayaku region of the Amazon in Ecuador believe in the "living forest", where humans, animals and plants live in harmony. They are fighting oil companies who want to exploit their ancestral land. A delegation of indigenous people are at the Paris COP21 climate conference to make sure their voices are heard. Can they win their battle? Tweeting a photo from a climate strike, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: Kate Connolly, the Guardian and Observer's Berlin correspondent, has been out this morning in the German capital. Strikes are planned for at least seven Nigerian cities, such as Lagos, which is clogged by mountains of toxic waste including thousands of tons of e-waste from the EU, particularly the UK and Germany. There will be a protest in Port Harcourt, capital of the country's oil-producing region, whose residents and their possessions have been covered in soot for the past few years, believed to be the result of destroying illegal oil refineries. There will also be two protests against a proposed coal plant in San Pedro in Ivory Coast, while in Ghana, a group called Young Reporters for the Environment is leading a march from the city hall of the capital, Accra. Next Friday, there will be a demonstration in Kumasi, the capital of Ghana's Ashanti region. Ghana is losing its rainforests faster than any other country, with a 60% increase in primary forest loss from 2017 to 2018. In Senegal, there are marches in Rufisque and Thies this Friday, a climate camp in Kaolack on Sunday, followed by a demonstration against a new coal plant in Bargny, and a march in the capital, Dakar on the 27th. Air pollution in Dakar is causing more and more respiratory problems, in large part because of "dirty", sulphur-laden diesel. Environmental activists Greta Thunberg and George Monbiot have helped produce a short film highlighting the need to protect, restore and use nature to tackle the climate crisis. Berlin's main transport line, the S-Bahn, has virtually ground to a halt this morning due to a major engineering breakdown leaving many protesters stranded and unable to reach the protest. Participants are being encouraged to take their bikes instead. Many have pointed out the irony. Meanwhile, at the Brandenburg Gate, scene of the main protest in Berlin that is due to kick off just before noon, protesters have been organised into neat blocks. Apart from the huge crowds of protesters, the other uplifting piece of climate news today is that onshore wind has just became the cheapest source of energy in the UK. Industry analysts can't believe how quickly the price has fallen. This shows the transition away from fossil fuels is much more affordable than people dared hope five years ago. On the business side of things, also encouraging to note efforts by companies with a green reputation, who seem to be competing to do more by selling less. The Patagonia outdoor clothing store will close all its European outlets today and next Friday so staff can join the protests. Ben & Jerry's and Lush also shutting today. Burton, the winter sports chain, is giving workers a paid day off to join the strike and have halted online sales for 24 hours. The company's webpage today reads "Closed for business. Open for action. Let's protect our playground." In London, where big crowds are expected to gather near Westminster from 11am, the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, has thrown his weight behind today's strikes. He told the Guardian this morning he fully supports schools across the city who are "working with pupils and allowing them time, without sanction, to peacefully and lawfully join the strikes today". "It is unbelievable that we need strike action for the future of our planet to be taken seriously by government's around the world," he said. "I fully support the thousands of young people peacefully and lawfully protesting around the country today who feel so strongly about the climate change emergency and I share their frustration. The stark reality is we are running out of time for meaningful change. The climate crisis is one of the very biggest challenges we face - I have declared a climate emergency in London - and governments around the world are failing to take the action we need." Berlin has kicked off its Fridays For Future this morning with road blockades, cycle rallies and a demonstration in front of the cuboid chancellery of Angela Merkel, where about 40 young people have unfurled a banner asking: "Return of the climate chancellor?" It's an appeal to Merkel, once environment minister, to live up to the reputation she is seen to have squandered over everything from her support of the car industry to her refusal to back a phase-out of brown coal mining. They are keen to pressurise her coalition government ahead of the launch of its much-awaited package of climate emergency measures which the cabinet has spent the night negotiating and is due to launch early this afternoon. The protesters are chanting: "Wir sind hier, wir sind laut, weil Ihr uns die Zukunft raubt." -"We are here and we are loud, because you're stealing our future". The main protest at the Brandenburg Gate is due to start just before noon. When there is protest in Berlin, there is usually also techno, and from 3pm a "Rave Rebellion" march will depart from Potsdamer Platz square, under the motto "No Future No Dancefloor". Extinction Rebellion has announced plans to block traffic at strategic points "where it will hurt drivers" around the capital. Elsewhere, 400 protests have been announced across the country, which will likely attracts adults as well as children. An umbrella organisation that includes organisations such as "Psychologists for Future", "Entrepreneurs for Future" and "Grandparents for Future" has called for people to join in, as has the services union Verdi and the German Protestant Church. "We stand side by side with Fridays for Future", said Annette Kurschus, the president of the Protestant Church of Westphalia, "Planet Earth does not belong to us, it has only been entrusted in our care". Germany has two faces when it comes to the environment: the country that prides itself in its high recycling rates, phasing out nuclear power and pioneering renewable energies is still the world's sixth biggest pollutant, with 865m tonnes of CO2 emissions in 2018. Borne out of this realisation, much of the recent debate in the country has focused on the phase-out of the country's approximately 130 smoke-belching coal plants. The government wants to close them down by 2038 - too soon for many unions, especially in the coal-rich east, and too late for climate activists galvanised by Fridays for Future. In Europe's "car nation", air pollution through exhaust fumes is another contentious issue, with some cities having introduced driving bans for diesel cars last year. The Fridays for Future protests have had a tangible effect on the political climate, with several polls earlier this year showing the Green party emerging as the strongest political force in the country. Many other parties have tried to copy its message, with even the arch-conservative Bavarian Christian Social Union calling for a coal phase-out by 2030, bans on plastic bags and new wind farms. Angela Merkel's coalition government is expected to announce a plan for tackling climate change, rumoured to involve (EURO)75bn of investment by 2030, just in time for Friday's climate strike. The planet's average temperature started a steady climb two centuries ago, but has rocketed since the second world war as consumption and population has risen. Global heating means there is more energy in the atmosphere, making extreme weather events more frequent and more intense. Heatwaves, droughts and floods are likely in the future if urgent action isn't taken to stop climate change, experts warn. It comes as strikes take place across the world on Friday, calling on governments to take immediate action on climate change. The demonstrates have been planned ahead of the landmark UN climate action summit in New York on 23 September World leaders will discuss how they can reduce their carbon emissions with the aim of stopping global temperature rise from exceeding 1.5°C under the Paris agreement. Prof Nigel Arnell, professor of climate system science at the University of Reading: This week, the United Nations general assembly will be discussing how to encourage countries to be more ambitious in their targets to reduce future emissions of greenhouse gases. It's clear that increased effort is needed if we are to avoid significant climate change impacts. We're probably already seeing some of the consequences of climate change - heatwaves, wildfires, unusually slow and intense hurricanes - and things will get much worse if we continue on our current path of increasing emissions. We recently published a study showing the number of people exposed to major heatwaves would increase from 330 million per year now to up to 8 billion per year in 2050 - just 30 years away - the number people exposed to drought would increase from 400 million per year to up to 1 billion per year, and the number of people affected by flooding from major rivers would increase from 15 million per year now to up to 100 million per year. Reducing emissions now will reduce these impacts, but at the same time we also need to increase efforts to enhance resilience to the impacts that are inevitable following our emissions so far." Keith Shine, regius professor of meteorology and climate science at the University of Reading: We are coming to the end of another decade. Each of the past four decades has, when averaged over the whole planet, been 0.1 to 0.2 degrees celsius warmer than the decade before; carbon dioxide levels have continued their relentless rise; and methane levels have grown much more rapidly than in the previous decade. Unless things start to change markedly over the coming decade, it is going to get harder and harder to meet the goals of the UN's Paris agreement on climate change." Protests taking place in Johannesburg, South Africa's biggest city and capital of Gauteng province. The Guardian environment journalist Fiona Harvey will be on hand to answer any questions you have about the climate crisis between 1.30 and 2.30pm BST. You can share your questions now via our form here, or in the comments below but please @Fiona so that they'll be easier for us to find. With hundreds of thousands of children joining the global youth strike in cities around the globe, Extinction Rebellion UK said it stands in solidarity with all those striking. Caspar Hughes, 48, a Extinction Rebellion activist and father of school striker Max, 12, said: "Parents have left their children to clear up the climate and ecological crisis they have created. The youth should be out partying rather than protesting." Extinction Rebellion activists will join the strikes in London and are holding their own actions and performances. At 2.30pm, a concert will take place in Victoria Tower Gardens, London. Jonathan Watts, the Guardian's global environment editor, has written about young activists calling for north-south solidarity to the tackle climate emergency. He writes: While previous generations failed to notice the slowly shifting baselines, today's young will watch the sixth great wave of extinction accelerate before their eyes. Due to warming seas and acid bleaching, coral reef systems will flicker out one by one. Species that existed for millions of years will tip into the abyss. Among those closest to the edge are the black rhino, the Chinese giant salamander, the Siberian crane, the Western gorilla, the Ganges dolphin, Bactrian camels, Pygmi sloths and Attenborough's long-beaked echidna. Thousands of species of insects, plants and amphibians may go extinct before they are discovered. For many young people today, their only chance of seeing unspoiled beaches, savannahs, reefs and forests will be on old documentaries, 3D interactives or their grandparents' holiday videos. Picturesque landscapes that defined communities and nations will be transformed. Read the full article here. The climate change strikes have spread far and wide, including the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific. By William Yang in Taipei In Taiwan, dozens of representatives from primary schools, high schools, and universities gathered in the capital, Taipei, to launch a petition called "Fridays for the future". The aim of it is to press candidates in the upcoming presidential election to lay out concrete policies to mitigate climate change risks that Taiwan faces. Some held signs that said: "It's getting hot in here" and "Don't drop it like it's hot", after popular song lyrics. Student activists spoke on stage, sharing their personal reasons for joining the global campaign to fight climate change. Wei Hung-zhan, aged nine, said: "Our future has been sacrificed by the older generation." He asked: "Why hasn't the older generation remembered to share earth's resources with the next generation?" Students said that they planned to mail their petitions to each presidential candidate's office and ask politicians to provide complete responses to their demands through online live-broadcasts in a month. The event's organiser Chang Li-Wen said: "The only candidate who cares about Taiwan's future is the person who proposes a complete set of climate change policies." Over the next week, a series of climate change events are scheduled across Taiwan, including major rallies in Taipei and Kaohsiung on 27 September. People are taking to the streets in Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh, in southern Asia. Climate change in Bangladesh is a pressing issue. According to National Geographic, Bangladesh is one the most vulnerable nations to the impacts of climate change. Millions are marching across the globe in what could be the largest climate protest in history. The first of the worldwide protests took place in Australia, where an estimated 300,000 people gathered at more than 100 rallies calling for action to guard against climate change. Other demonstrations were held across parts of Asia. In the UK, children and young people across the country will walk out of lessons and lectures They will be joined by hundreds of thousands of workers. The school strikes movement was sparked by the teenage activist Greta Thunberg who demonstrated at the Swedish parliament. The first large-scale protests of Friday's "global climate strike" took place in Sydney and Canberra, with demonstrators calling on leaders in Australia, the world's largest exporter of coal and liquid natural gas, to take more drastic action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Similar rallies are planned for around the world, with 800 events set to take place in the US and 400 in Germany. The protests come ahead of a climate summit at the UN next week convened by the secretary general, António Guterres, to urge countries to up their climate efforts. Much stronger measures are needed across the globe to prevent temperature rises of more than 1.5C (2.7F) or 2C (3.6F) to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. The Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said: "It is unbelievable that we should need global strike action for the future of our planet to be taken seriously. The stark reality is that our climate is changing rapidly and we are running out of time to address it. "I hope governments around the world who are failing to take action hear the voices of millions of people, young and old, unified in their call for action to save our planet. Our future depends on it." The level of CO2 has been rising since the industrial revolution and is at its highest for about 4 million years. The rate of the rise is even more striking - the fastest for 66m years - with scientists saying we are in "uncharted territory". Strikes are also taking place in Uganda, east Africa. They are also under way in Nairobi, Kenya's capital. Events in Italy will be held throughout the coming week, culminating with demonstrations in more than 100 cities on Friday 27 September. "Italian schools only went back last week and we needed some time to plan and mobilise, so we voted to hold the major demonstrations on the 27th," said David Wicker, a representative of the Turin branch of Fridays for Future Italia. More than 470,000 people took part in the first global climate strike in Italy on 15 March and a similar number is expected to join next week's demonstrations. Though Italy's greenhouse gas emissions have been decreasing over the past decade, the country was criticised this year by the European Climate Foundation for failing to provide an adequate plan to further reduce emissions and dependency on fossil fuels. Activists are hoping Italy's new left-leaning coalition will take concrete action and fulfil its pledge of making environmental issues a priority. "They need to entirely cut the subsidies and investments going to the fossil fuel industry," said Wicker, aged 14. "And we need to start immediate investment in green energy to help society have an ecological transition." Young activists for Fridays for Future in Turin, one of the most polluted cities in Europe, have been holding the local authority to account over its environmental policies. "The town hall gives us feedback every two months and we give this information to scientists, who will say whether anything is really being done or not," said Wicker. Emmanuel Macron's government has set the object of making France carbon-neutral by 2050. However, greenhouse gas emissions have risen in the country since 2015, and in 2017 were said to be 7% above official targets. Climate change activists say Macron has gone back on promises. Sceptics doubt claims the government would renovate 500,000 buildings a year to use less energy and are angry at what is seen as bowing to the powerful agriculture lobby over pesticides. Meanwhile, it is the mainstream centre-right that has proven most resistant to Greta Thunberg's appeals. The announcement that the Swedish teenager was to address the French assemblée nationale in July provoked outbursts of indignation and insults from opposition MPs. "Don't expect me to be applauding a prophet in short trousers," tweeted one. Others appealed for a boycott of her address. Le Monde pointed out French climate change sceptics were no longer attacking the message but the messenger and pointed to a "smear campaign" against Thunberg. After a slow start - an action that involved only 150 protesters in February in Nantes, reports suggest 56 organisations, ecology associations and social rights groups in France plan to demonstrate on Friday and Saturday. Youth for Climate France has organised a number of marches across France, and youngsters cave called on adults to join their action. They urged citizens: "Strike for the climate, which means above all leave your home, your office, your farm or your factory. Smashing the status quo requires the involvement of everyone: sportsmen and women, actors, teachers, food industry workers, psychologists, delivery people, it doesn't matter. Whatever our position, we can all bring our stone to the building by refusing to accept the status quo." In Paris, a march will begin at Place de la Nation and finish with a gathering at Parc de Bercy with workshops, conferences and "citizens' meetings". Several French unions including the powerful CFDT and CGT have issued calls for joint mobilisation. The action group Libérons le Louvre (Liberate the Louvre) is planning an action at the museum in protest at its long-standing partnership with the petrol group Total. Last year, black-clad members of the ecology association 350.org lay down in one of the Louvre's galleries in protest at Total's financial support of the museum, which dates back more than 20 years and which Louvre officials say has funded "exhibitions, renovations, educational and cultural activities and social actions". Among the specific demands of French climate activists is that the French national education system introduces the teaching of the "environmental situation" and that France and the European Union officially declare a state of "climate, environmental and social" emergency. In France, a second day of protests on Saturday is planned to mark World CleanUp Day. A government minister said he cannot endorse children leaving school to take part in the climate strikes. Minister for business, energy and clean growth Kwasi Kwarteng told BBC Breakfast on Friday that he supported the "energy and creativity" of students but said time spent in school was "incredibly important". When asked if the government was listening to the young protesters, he said: "Their voices are being heard... What I do support is their energy, their creativity, and the fact that they have completely mastered these issues and take them very seriously. "I am not going to endorse people leaving school because I think education, time spent in school is incredibly important." Here are the final exclusive Twitter figures for the climate strike in Australia. And this is what the school strike conversation has looked like on Twitter in the past three days leading up to today's demonstrations: There is a lot planned for South Africa today, with demonstrations in Johannesburg, the commercial capital, on the south-eastern coast in Durban, in Pretoria, and in Cape Town, where there'll be a march on parliament. Ayakha Melithafa, 17, said she would be joining the global strike in Cape Town.The march won't start until early afternoon to allow students to finish most of the school day. "We'll be marching to parliament to demand that the government take this issue seriously. It needs to declare a climate emergency here in South Africa, and a moratorium on coal, gas and oil mining licences. They have just ignored the problem so far," Melithafa said. South Africa is one of the continent's most developed economies and relies heavily on coal powered energy generation. It is building new and very big coal-fired power stations. "We have arranged with our teachers to leave early. it is up to us. We are the leaders of today. We don't just want the system to change. We want a brand new system which will help us live sustainably with a bright new future," Melithafa said. A roundup of what is happening around Europe on Friday: France Youth for Climate France has organised a number of marches across the country, and youngsters cave called on adults to join their action. In Paris, a march will begin at Place de la Nation and finish with a gathering at Parc de Bercy with workshops, conferences and "citizens' meetings". A second day of protests on Saturday are planned to mark World CleanUp Day. Italy More than 470,000 people took part in the first global climate strike in Italy on 15 March and a similar number is expected to join next Friday's demonstrations. Germany Nearly 500 climate change demonstrations are planned across Germany on Friday. In Berlin, several demonstrations will take place throughout the day. The Fridays for Future gathering starts at noon at the Brandenburg Gate under the motto: "Everyone for the climate." Organisers expect 10,000 people. Why is this week important? The strikes take place ahead of the UN general assembly and the climate action summit on 23 September. The summit will bring together governments, the private sector, civil society, local authorities and other international organisations to develop ambitious solutions. The world's leaders will converge on New York for the assembly, where each is given an (unenforced) time limit of 15 minutes to speak in front of the green marble podium. Leaders occupy positions in the hall in alphabetical order by country name, usually with a different nation occupying the first seat each year. General assembly week usually makes news in the first day or two, when the US president and other powerful heads of state tend to have their moment, and then attention tends to tail off. For that reason, there is always some horse trading before the general assembly week, with prime ministers from big countries trying to swap speaking slots with presidents of small countries. Are you taking part in a climate strike or marking the day in any way? If so, we'd like to hear from you. Tell us what you're doing and where and share any photos and videos via our reader call out here. If you prefer you can also share via WhatsApp by adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian will see your responses and we will include some of your stories in our ongoing coverage. Activists on bicycles block traffic at Ernst-Reuter-Platz square in Berlin, Germany, as they take part in the global climate strike today. There will be a "special takeover" of Channel 4's usual evening weather report today, as the network joins the world's largest climate strike. The channel's social media accounts will also join the walkout, bosses said, and will be going on strike between 9.30am and 5.30pm. Additionally, continuity announcers will share facts drawn from World Meteorological Organisation research throughout the day on Channel 4. No details were given on the nature of the weather forecast's "special takeover". Across Britain, thousands will take part in a march. Worldwide, campaigners say there are more than 3,400 events planned in 120 countries, with numbers taking part expected to surpass the estimated 1.6 million people who took part in the global strike in March. The outdoor apparel brand Patagonia is closing every store worldwide to encourage employees and customers to join the climate strike. Demonstrators from more than 150 countries are expected to put pressure on governments and decision-makers to do more about climate issues. The strikes come ahead of the United Nations climate change summit, which begins on 23 September. While in the UK and many other countries the strike is taking place today, in some countries such as Italy and the Netherlands the strike is happening next Friday, 27 September. Explaining the decision to close stores, Ryan Gellert, the general manager, EMEA, Patagonia, said: "The climate crisis is a human issue - affecting all of us... As a global business, we will be closing our stores on 20 and 27 September, striking with the youth activists and calling for governments around the world to take action." The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, will today thank young people for educating the world about the climate crisis. Speaking at the youth climate strike, Corbyn will also criticise the prime minister, Boris Johnson, for calling global warming a "primitive fear". He is expected to say: To the young people leading by example today here and across the world, I want to say thank you: thank you for educating us about the climate crisis and the emergency of species extinction and biodiversity loss. I know the situation can look bleak. We have a prime minister that has called global warming a 'primitive fear without foundation'. The US president is a full-blown climate denier, putting our planet in danger by pulling out of the Paris climate agreement. And the Amazon is on fire, looted by big corporations with a Brazilian president watching on who doesn't care. But when we see young people demanding urgent action, it's an inspiration. When I see this movement growing - and it's growing every day - I know we can tackle the climate emergency. The next Labour government will welcome your pressure and hear your demands for change. We will kick-start a green Industrial revolution and protect our planet, so it's there to give life and joy to generations to come." I will be picking up the live blog from the Guardian's London offices. Please share any photographs or comments from where you are with me: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com I'll be handing over the blog now to my colleague Sarah Marsh. There are still hundreds of places, thousands of students and hours of protest to come. Stay with us as the strikes sweep across Asia, Africa and Europe, and into the Americas. There will also be plenty more Australian news and analysis to come. To recap what we've seen across Asia and the Pacific today: At least 300,000 people have taken part in the largest climate strike across Australia yet. Melbourne's event drew 100-150,000 people, and Sydney's 80-100,000. Hobart's 22,000 attendees made it Tasmania's biggest ever strike action. Hundreds of regional centres joined in - from Alice Springs, Byron Bay and Katherine. As part of Guardian Australia's coverage, the federal energy minister, the opposition energy spokesman and two of the country's biggest energy companies took questions from students. In Vanuatu, the deputy prime minister spoke directly to the US, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as countries "to blame for this threat to our survival". Protests also unfolded in the Solomon Islands, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan, India, Pakistan and more. As our Australian coverage wraps up, here's a great round-table discussion from some Brisbane students. They've finally started marching in Melbourne. And here's our video wrap of the thousands on the streets today. More from Lisa Cox in Melbourne Edie Shepherd, a Wiradjuri and Noongar woman, spoke to the crowd earlier. She said she'd recently visited communities in the Lake Woods region in the NT, an area that gas companies are proposing to frack. "While Lake Woods usually flows with water, this time it ran dry," she said. As well as students, unions are here today. Sam Davis is a member of the National Union of Workers and was here with his young family. "We want to show that climate justice is very important to workers as well. A lot of our workers are going to be impacted by climate change in the near future too," he says. "The values we have as unionists are why I've brought my kids." They've started in Mumbai: In Pakistan: While in Melbourne, the crowd is so big it's going to take a few more hours: If you're waking up in Europe and the UK, then here is where you can find a protest near you: And here's First Dog's last cartoon for today: The organisers of the School Strike For Climate have estimated more than 300,000 people took to the streets across Australia today. More than double the number of Australians who rallied at climate strikes in March came out today, with an estimated 100,000 in Melbourne, 80,000 in Sydney, 30,000 in Brisbane, 20,000 in Hobart, 15,000 in Canberra, 10,000 in Perth and 10,000 in Adelaide, not to mention the other more than 100 events in non-capital cities and towns. Organisations striking included 33 Australian unions, 2,500 businesses including Atlassian, Canva, Domain and Intrepid, and faith institutions including the Anglican Church & Uniting Church, they said. There are well over 100,000 people here in Melbourne and organisers are talking about 150,000. Niamh, 17, from Castlemaine told the crowd: "I fight for climate justice because everyone deserves a safe future. The government is not supporting it yet, but together we will change that." Freya, 16, from Melbourne said: "The climate crisis is a human and global issue, and we need to act now." The students spoke about recent natural disasters around the world, including massive wildfires in the Amazon and the early bushfires that have caused devastation in Queensland and NSW. "This is predicted to get a lot worse if we don't act now," Niamh said. The students then spoke about the demands of young people striking today, which include the complete phase-out of fossil fuels. The students have gone to great lengths to talk about the need to secure the futures of workers in fossil fuel-intensive industries, whose livelihoods will be affected as economies become carbon-neutral. Freya said: "We understand the role fossil fuels have played in putting food on the table for families. It's vital we all work together, not against one another. It's not about jobs v the environment." Tens if not hundreds of thousands packed out Sydney's Domain park in the CBD. Moemoana, 18, has come from Wollongong to the protest, and her homeland is Samoa. She's here with members of the Matavai Pacific cultural centre. "I've come to fight for the Pacific. The Pacific Islands are [only] metres above sea level because of climate change and it's a scary future for our islands. We want to urge people to take some action. "Seas are rising [in] Pacific Islands, especially Tuvalu and Kiribati, it's a real threat, and Australia needs to know that Pacifika are neighbours and Australia really needs to help out. 17-year-old protest organiser Daisy spoke of the third demand of the campaign: funding a just transition and job creation for all fossil-fuel workers and communities. "We need solutions that care for people and our planet," she said. "Climate justice is not about jobs versus the environment. Just as climate change hurts people, unemployment hurts people." She said too many people were already suffering and would suffer if governments did not find solutions. "If our government cares about all of us then they need to get on with the job of stopping any new coal, oil and gas projects, powering Australia with 100% renewable energy by no later than 2030, and doing all this while funding just transition and jobs for all fossil fuel workers and their communities so that no one is left behind." Marlie Thomas, a Kamilaroi teenager from Gunnedah, said she was attending the rally on the authority of her elders, not the Department of Education. "I've had to help collect bottled water for our family in Walgett," she said. Former federal MP and City of Sydney councillor Kerryn Phelps told Guardian Australia cities "need to play their part when it comes planning for the future and mitigating climate change". "That includes our own operations, working with businesses and residents, providing incentives to people to reduce their carbon footprint, to encourage active public transport, to encourage renewable sources of energy. "And because of the sheer size of the population, not only do they contribute so much to climate change risk but they also have the most, I think, to offer. Obviously we've got the agriculture sector, which needs to play its part, the transport sector, but individuals also can do so much themselves." With the Australian strikes not even half over in many places, here's what has happened so far: Hundreds of thousands have participated in the largest climate strike across Australia yet: more than 100 locations, from capital cities to regional centres such as Alice Springs, Byron Bay and Katherine. In Sydney and Melbourne crowds were estimated at 80,000 to 150,000 respectively, making them the biggest demonstrations since the Iraq war. In Tasmania 22,000 marchers made it the biggest strike action the state had ever seen. As part of Guardian Australia's coverage, the federal energy minister, the opposition energy spokesman and two of the country's biggest energy companies took questions from students. In Vanuatu, the deputy prime minister spoke directly to the US, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as countries "to blame for this threat to our survival". Protests in the Solomon Islands, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong and many more also continued throughout the day. They're marching in the Philippines, too. Justin McCurry in Japan writes: Japan has suffered unseasonable, powerful and fatal storms in recent years that have also inflicted serious damage on its infrastructure. Last week's typhoon was unusually strong, leaving hundreds of thousands of people without power. The country has also been hit by record-breaking heatwaves - one last summer killed 65 people in a single week. Japan's government had planned to expand nuclear power in an effort to tackle carbon dioxide emissions, but the Fukushima disaster changed all that. Pressure is building to invest more in renewables as the government expands coal-fired power stations and imports of gas and oil to fill the energy gap left by the post-Fukushima closure of dozens of nuclear reactors. Japan's involvement in the climate strike has been low key. This Friday adults and children belonging to the Fridays for Future Tokyo movement will gather outside the United Nations University in central Tokyo at 5pm, make speeches and then march through the streets of the capital. Just over 100 people turned up in March; students at Japanese state schools were noticeably absent and I think that will be the case this Friday. A few protests have begun in Japan, and one is scheduled for Tokyo at 5pm local time. I cannot stress enough that my favourite thing from today is students on the ground interviewing their fellow strikers. Here is Oscar Lander-McBride, 10, interviewing Zac, 13. And from earlier, Esther Plummer, 13, interviewing Jasper, 15. There are more than 100,000 people in Melbourne, according to organisers. An aerial view of Melbourne, only 30 minutes in. And here's the march crossing Brisbane's Victoria bridge: In Bali: In Singapore: And in Brisbane who better to give a crowd estimate than Haemish Lander-McBride, 13, who has been to the past two strikes. "It's massive in comparison to the other ones... People aren't just going to the first one - people are really coming again and again and again." And big crowds in Adelaide: An estimated 10,000 in Perth: Mike Bowers in Canberra: It's just past 2pm, which is the official start time in Melbourne. But as we saw in Sydney, crowds are so huge there are lines to get in. It'll take a while to get into full swing. Early crowd numbers out of Sydney: 50,000 to 80,000 people at least. More from First Dog: Over on 2GB in Sydney and 4BC in Brisbane this morning Alan Jones was keeping a sceptical eye on the climate strike. "If you ask some of these people what it was about they wouldn't have a clue," Jones said without actually asking any of the strikers that question. An elderly caller suggested the children's minds were being manipulated just like those of the Hitler Youth in Germany decades ago. Warming to the theme, Jones had a Goebbels quote on hand: "I will remind our listeners that his minister of propaganda ,Joseph Goebbels, also said it would not be impossible to prove with sufficient repetition and the psychological understanding of the people concerned that a square is in fact a circle. They are mere words and words can be moulded until they clothe ideas in disguise. This is what's going on here isn't it? Immensely disturbing I have to say. Immensely disturbing." Former Queensland Greens senator Andrew Bartlett has this estimate: Similar thoughts in Sydney: The Brisbane rally keeps growing. People are still streaming in 30 minutes after the posted start time and police have had to shut roads on two sides of Queens Park. Hard to guess at a crowd figure, but comfortably over 10,000 at this point. This is not, of course, an anti-government rally, but there's certainly no love for the coal embrace of the Queensland government. And notably, there are at least a half dozen left-wing unions here. The Electrical Trades Union has just taken a swipe, officials complaining the government has let the private sector do the heavy lifting on renewables, and giving a strong endorsement of climate action. Rebecca Ratcliffe in Delhi writes: Students protesters in India have a long list of demands for their political leaders. The air in many of its cities is infamously toxic, poor waste management is putting lives at risk and water shortages have reached crisis levels. Last year India was ranked among the bottom five countries on the environmental performance index produced by Yale and Columbia universities and the World Economic Forum. "We are in September now and we would be usually subjected to monsoon rains at this time but the rainfall is so erratic," said Jacintha Thota, 14, who lives in Hyderabad. On Friday 200 students from her school and some of their teachers are expected to march together. Hyderabad is one of tens of locations, including Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru, where protests are expected to take place. The Fridays for Future movement is much smaller than other more established environmental campaigns in India, but students say it is growing in popularity, thanks partly to social media. In Delhi protesters are planning seven days of action, which includes marching to the ministry of urban affairs and housing on Friday. On Sunday protesters will meet at Bhalswa landfill, the second biggest dump yard in the city, while next week they will protest at other key political buildings. Bhavreen Kandhari, an environmental activist from Fridays For Future India will take part. "We have beautiful laws on the paper but none of it is being executed," she said. Five years ago, when her daughters had an X-ray, she discovered the impact of Delhi's pollution. "Their lungs were black in colour; they should be pink. For a child who is born and brought up in Delhi for 10 years this is the damage that they suffer," she said. Her twin daughters, 15, will also be attending the march in Delhi. "The rich think 'Oh I'll put a mask on my child', 'I'll get an air purifier', and the poorest they can barely make two meals [a day]." Big turnout in Thailand - and a reminder that many of the protests in Asia will be kicking into gear soon as well. Wait no, maybe this one: Calling the winner now Meanwhile the Brisbane protest has broken its banks and people are streaming down the streets. There's already a crowd at Treasury Gardens for the Melbourne school strike which kicks off at 2pm. Thea Hamilton, 16, is one of the organisers. "I'm really excited and hopefully we'll be able to get some really good action out of this and get more people involved in climate action and climate justice," she says. She says young people "are looking for a space to be heard and to really feel represented by this global movement so we can call for climate action at the UN global climate summit on the 23rd". Continuing our series. EnergyAustralia has agreed to take a question from a climate striker. Along with Queensland's Stanwell Corporation, it is the other one of Australia's top 10 carbon emitters to agree to take a question. Josh O'Callaghan, 15, from Adelaide asks: What are the future initiatives that your company plans to put in place to have 100% renewable energy production? Mark Collette, the head of EnergyAustralia's customer business: Thanks Josh. Designing and building a 100% renewable energy system is a huge challenge for Australia. I think Australians are up for the challenge. Your home state of South Australia has solar and wind already providing over half of the electricity supplied to South Australians. In planning for 100% renewables, the first 50% is easier than the second 50%. Solar and wind generation follow the sun and the wind, so when it is not sunny and windy we can't produce power for customers. I reckon that above about 50% renewables for Australia we need to find ways to move the power from the sun and the wind to dark and still times, or use it immediately. One way we do this is storage. Already we have two of the largest batteries in the country in Victoria, and we are working on two large pumped hydro projects - one of which is in your state of South Australia. Another way we are exploring is helping customers use power when it is available from the sun and the wind. We can time pool pumps and hot water systems to run just through these times. There's a long way to go but we like tackling tough problems, like the second 50%." In Sydney Daisy, 17, tells the crowd their frustration has never been about people working in the fossil-fuel industry. Their demand is "about acting to halt this crisis while creating safe and meaningful work for all of us". And let's not forget the regions. More photos from Lismore from Frewoini Baume: And these beautiful pictures from Katherine in the NT: And here's Albury: The crowd in Sydney is getting so big you can really only see it from the air. Perth and Canberra aren't too shabby either: This is the third nationwide climate strike in Australia - after November 2018 and March 2019. They get bigger every time. Amelia Neylon, 16, is on the ground and tells Guardian Australia: The crowd is reportedly over 22,000. Bob Brown at this count has said it is larger then the Franklin River rally. Making this the largest rally in Tasmania held to date. It's all happening. Another must-watch, exclusive to Guardian Australia: Meanwhile Australia's strikes are making waves around the world: If you are Gen X or above, then you can laugh at the latest from First Dog on the Moon instead*: *This is a joke - First Dog is funny for all ages. I'm a millennial / Gen Z so I understand these signs. If you don't, rest assured they are very funny. In Brisbane, here's Parker with his message to the government - and a great poem. The award for best sign is getting more competitive every minute. Here is Matilda (3). Sydney's strikes have started but aren't even at full swing, Melbourne's starts in 1.5 hours, and preparations have begun in Perth. Earlier today we saw huge turnouts in regional areas, including Alice Springs and Byron Bay. Angus Taylor has also agreed to take a question. From Josh O'Callaghan, 15, from Adelaide: It is said that 'if those who believe in climate change are wrong, we will have needlessly created a cleaner world, but if those who don't believe in climate change are wrong, we will die'. Do you agree? If so, how should we act on this? Angus Taylor : The federal government is taking strong action to reduce global emissions and respond to the serious challenge of climate change. The government's $3.5bn climate solutions package sets out how we will meet our 2030 Paris target, down to the last tonne. People are free to have their views, but my personal opinion is that students should be at school during school hours." Reporter Helen Davidson is on the ground in Sydney: Our first dispatches from Amelia Neylon in Hobart: Meanwhile crowds build in Sydney. There is a LONG line to get in. Esther in Byron Bay has interviewed her fellow strikers. Must-watch. First images in from Hobart: Sydney's strike is scheduled to start at noon. Huge crowds are still making their way to the city. This could take some time and is looking immense. Some footage from Thailand: Continuing our Q&A series is Labor's spokesman on climate change and energy, Mark Butler. Frewoini Baume, 18, from Lismore asks: Permanent destruction for temporary economic gain is not a sustainable or stable economy. Why are you supporting the coal industry when it has been scientifically proven to be unsustainable? Yes, the economy may temporarily suffer but the longer you wait the more severe the impact. So why not act now? Mark Butler: The Labor party remains deeply committed to taking climate action to make sure that we comply with the commitments to future generations in the Paris agreement - to keep global warming way below 2 degrees and to pursue efforts around 1.5 degrees to make sure that we are at net zero emissions by the middle of the century. There is no denying that Australia needs to drastically reduce its carbon emissions, but after coming down by more than 10% when Labor was last in office, emissions have been rising ever since the election of Tony Abbott, and the government's own data shows they will keep rising all the way to 2030. Australia doesn't have a national climate policy. That is why we need to keep pressuring the Liberal government to take serious climate action." Some more charts, this time Australia-specific from our data editor, Nick Evershed: This first shows warming in Australia, measuring how different the temperature is in a given year against the long-term average. Put simply, it demonstrates how things are getting hotter, and 2018 was the third-hottest year: This second shows Australia's quarterly emissions over time. The bars need to be under the two lines (assuming a linear rate of reduction to meet the target) if we are going to meet various emissions targets. The pink line shows the trajectory to a 28% reduction in emissions, based on 2005 levels, by 2030. This is the more ambitious of Australia's possible reduction targets under the Paris agreement. The purple line is the trajectory proposed by the Climate Change Authority based on the best available science to ensure Australia makes a meaningful contribution towards keeping global temperature increases under 2C. Ideally the bars should be below both lines. And some early data from Twitter: #ClimateStrike is trending #1 in Australia and has been for the past two hours #schoolstrike4climate is at #2 and #friday4future is at #5 Australian cities where #climatestrike is trending: Adelaide #2 Darwin #1 Melbourne #1 Perth #1 Sydney #1 An on-the-ground sketch from First Dog on the Moon You may have noticed the arresting temperature chart at the top of our site this morning - I know I did. Our colleagues internationally have also compiled more charts that explain the climate crisis. And some slightly better news: In Lismore Frewoini Baume has interviewed Suhani Sheppeard, 16. FB: "Why are you striking?" SS: "I'm striking because I believe it takes one person to change the world. Having that opportunity to be that person is incredibly inspiring and I want to be the one voice to inspire others. "It feels incredibly empowering to be a part of the community in our global strike, and inspires me to always fight for climate justice." Jotham Napat, Vanuatu's deputy prime minister, delivered his speech in English "because the people who need to hear this, the ones who are causing the problems, are not here". According to the Vanuatu Posts' Dan McGarry, Napat named the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan and New Zealand as the ones who are "to blame for this threat to our survival". Earlier Vanuatu's foreign affairs minister, Ralph Regenvanu, also spoke and criticised Australia. He characterised the discussions at the recent Pacific Islands forum in Tuvalu as a "fight" between Australia and the rest of the Pacific. Regenvanu, an outspoken Pacific leader, has also promised to take his country's climate grievance to the International Court of Justice to seek legal redress. During the Pacific Islands forum Regenvanu told the Guardian that critical talks almost collapsed twice amid "fierce" clashes between Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, and other Pacific leaders. "Australia is out there - they're not with us," Regenvanu said at the time. Today students in Vanuatu partnered with the Vanuatu climate action network to stage a silent strike. Students wearing traditional dress and holding banners with messages about the climate crisis stood around the capital, Port Vila, as politicians walked around the city viewing the messages, finishing up at the seafront of the city where there were art exhibitions, poetry performances and speeches. In Albury the march will head to the office of the environment minister, Sussan Ley. Our first Q&A is in. The Stanwell Corporation is one of Australia's biggest energy companies. EnergyAustralia and Stanwell were the only members of Australia's top 10 carbon emitters who agreed to take a question for our live blog today. Narii Hamill-Salmon, 15, from the Gold Coast asks: The Stanwell Corporation was named as the nation's third largest carbon emitter in 2017-18 [by the Clean Energy Regulator] thus making the company a significant contributor to the climate crisis. Mr Van Breda, if you could say one thing to the future generations of this planet, the ones who are going to experience the most devastating impacts of climate change, what would you tell them?" Richard Van Breda, chief executive: Thanks for your question, Narii. I think a lot about that, and here's what I would tell future generations about the work we do at Stanwell. The electricity industry is at a tricky time in its transition to lower carbon technologies. The proportion of low carbon energy and storage in Australia is increasing quickly, but those technologies are not yet at a point where they can function without support from fossil fuel generation. As a company that operates coal-fired power stations, it's Stanwell's job to provide the electricity that people need, as the industry moves to a lower carbon future. That change can't happen immediately and needs to be planned and done carefully. We ramp generation from our coal-fired power stations up and down every day to support solar generation in the middle of the day, and still provide the electricity people need in the evenings. We are also exploring new generation and storage technology that will help reduce emissions. I'm really proud of the work Stanwell people are doing in all those areas." And Frewoini Baume, 18, has sent through the first few images of the Lismore strikes. If people want a last minute sign for the climate strike First Dog on the Moon says you can print this out on vegan paper and wave it about. More dispatches from Esther in Byron: There are big contingents and great photos coming in from all across the Pacific - especially Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands right now. And in Castlemaine, Victoria, where this all began (in Australia at least), there are no signs of slowing. Early signs from University of Sydney: And nearby, stores all along King Street have closed for the day in solidarity. In Gloucester New South Wales we have an early contender for best costume today (the sunflower). In a landmark decision earlier this year, a court blocked a new coalmine in the region because of the "dire consequences" of increasing emissions. Absolutely huge turnout in Geelong where they're singing and chanting. And more from Townsville: It's not even 11am yet on the east coast and it's already obvious today's protests are going to be bigger than ever before. First Barnesy now The Oils: In Vanuatu: The Knitting Nannas are already down in Lismore. Our first student on the ground Esther Plummer (13) has sent pictures from Byron Bay. Earlier we said 1,000 businesses are supporting the strike. That number is now 2,600, with the latest figures from Not Business As Usual. And here is music legend (and all-round legend) Jimmy Barnes, with his message of support to the strikers. In New Caledonia: Big turnout in Townsville. The event there started at 9am and they will be marching at 10am. Protesters are staging a die-in in the centre of Alice Springs. Traditional owners have stressed the importance of putting Indigenous perspectives at the centre of these protests. Yesterday Sammy Wilson, a custodian of Uluru and chair of the Central Land Council, announced that the council will join the strike across the Northern Territory. "Aboriginal people want to be part of the solution," he said. "We want to have access to clean technologies such as solar power so that our children have the chance to keep living on our traditional country. "I support their right to take this action [and] I call on them to spare a thought for Aboriginal people out bush who may not be able to travel to the strikes but who are already suffering most during our hotter, longer and drier summers." After the NT's hottest summer on record, delegates at the council meeting last month said climate change and water security were their top policy priorities. Kate Lamb in Jakarta writes: In Indonesia the climate strikes come as the country faces an escalating environmental emergency - tens of thousands of hectares of rainforest are burning in Sumatra and Kalimantan, home to some of the largest swathes of virgin forest in the world. This year the annual fires - a result of "slash and burn" practices to clear land mostly for palm oil plantations - have been exacerbated by the El Nino phenomenon and severe droughts. Thick haze has blanketed cities in Indonesia and neighbouring Singapore and Malaysia, and also forced schools to be closed and increased the risk of respiratory-related illnesses. Also on the minds of young Indonesian activists is how to curb the country's plastic addiction. Home to more than 250 million people, Indonesia is the second largest contributor to ocean plastics after China. But in recent years environmental awareness around plastics has gained momentum, largely driven by inspiring Indonesian students, artists, musicians and activists. On Friday hundreds are expected to take to the streets of Jakarta and 12 cities across the archipelago, on the islands of Java, Sumatra, Kalimantan and Bali. Expect colourful costumes, live performances from local indie bands, and talk of an "energy revolution". From here in the steamy tropics, the focus of that discussion will be on the future of solar energy. More from the Pacific from Kate Lyons Climate strike events kicked off in Tonga yesterday (which held its main event - a community clean-up on Thursday because of the significant number of Seventh Day Adventists in the country who observe the Sabbath on Fridays). Pacific countries, many of which are bearing the brunt of the effects of the climate crisis, are holding events today, though most are not holding strikes or traditional protests, instead focusing on community events such as clean-ups, barbecues and poetry performances. Things are already well under way in Alice Springs. Up to 60 local businesses have also shut their doors for today. Meanwhile preparations continue around the country. Eleanor Ainge Roy writes from Dunedin New Zealand is pushing back its participation in the strikes to Friday 27 September so high school students can sit national exams this week. Large strikes are planned nationwide. Sea level rise is a real and increasingly urgent threat to New Zealand. Most of New Zealand's nearly 5 million people live on the coast. Sea walls to protect vulnerable communities are being constructed - from the former gold-mining town of Hokitika on the west coast to vulnerable beachside huts in the isolated far north. Sea level rise is also a pressing issue for the country's Indigenous people, with their tribal marae [meeting houses] mostly on low-lying coastal land. Jacinda Ardern's Labour coalition government has vowed to tackle climate change head on, committing to making the country carbon neutral by 2050 and planting 1bn trees. The first climate strike in New Zealand was interrupted by the Christchurch mosque attacks, with children in central Christchurch shepherded into lockdown for hours. It was initially thought, incorrectly, that the striking children may have been a target. Amnesty International Aotearoa New Zealand's policy manager, Annaliese Johnston, says New Zealand youth climate groups have been instrumental in increasing awareness in the Pacific region. "The youth of today in New Zealand... have woken us all up to the urgent call to action to protect our common home and future." Greta Thunberg, the 16-year old Swedish student who inspired this movement, has recorded a short film for today's strike. In it, she and Guardian columnist George Monbiot talk about the importance of natural solutions - low-cost, effective initiatives such as rowing trees. And for a bit of a blast from the past you can read Thunberg's opinion piece from November 2018 - written specifically for Australia - when we became one of the first countries to hold nationwide student strikes. "In the Pacific we don't go on strike, but we do other things," says Patricia Mallam, a Fijian climate activist from 350.org. Over the course of the day children and students from Fiji, Samoa, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Marshall Islands, Tonga, New Caledonia, the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea will take part in poetry performances, silent protests, sporting events, barbecues and intergenerational discussions about the effects of climate change in the region. These events rather than traditional protests and street marches make more sense for the Pacific, says Mallam, because it is such a community-driven region "and we all know that the problem is not within the community". "For instance, you don't have any coalmines in the Pacific, so we can't have people striking outside coalmines. The problems are not being caused here. But in countries where there are coalmines or banks financing the fossil-fuel industry, it makes sense for people to go on strike, so they're voicing their distaste for what's going on to keep their economies afloat," she says over the phone from Fiji. "We all know that the problem is not being caused here in the Pacific, but we're facing the full brunt of the climate crisis." The Pacific is estimated to contribute just 0.03% of global emissions despite making up 0.12% of the world's population, but is at the frontline of the climate emergency, with countries facing rising sea levels, coastal erosion, the destruction of crucial reefs, inundations and warming seas that lead to more frequent and more severe cyclones. "It is a day, especially for the polluters, they need to quickly understand what's going on," says Mallam. "But at the same time, in the Pacific we feel that because we're at the frontline of the impacts, it's important for us to speak up and have other nations hear what's happening." Preparations are under way in the Solomon Islands already. And Kate Lyons spoke to some of the activists across the Pacific ahead of today's big day. Here's everything you need to know about today's strikes as collated by my colleague Lisa Cox. There are more than 100 locations, and the strikes have support from 30 unions, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, and more than 1,000 businesses including Atlassian, Future Super and KeepCup. And in news from this morning, more than 250 academics have also signed on in support. Morning everyone. Today the global climate strikes start in Australia and the Pacific. The Guardian Australia team will follow it all. We have a huge day of coverage planned. The Australian strikes will be in full swing from 11am or noon (local time) and before that in New Zealand and the Pacific. Our correspondents are standing by, and cartoonist First Dog on the Moon is on duty - they'll be sketching throughout the day. And because today is really about the students, we've organised to receive on-the-ground updates from participants. Here they are in a (non-exhaustive) list: Narii-Hamill Salmon, 15, Gold Coast Qld Frewoini Baume, 18, Lismore NSW Josh O'Callaghan, 15, Adelaide SA Amelia Neylon, 16, Hobart Tas Esther Plummer, 13, Byron Bay NSW Iestyn (13) and Owynn (11) Harries, Brisbane Qld Dakota Barret-Perry, 15, Melbourne Vic They have also been given the opportunity to ask a question directly of federal politicians and prominent business leaders - from the energy minister to EnergyAustralia. We'll publish the questions and their answers throughout the day. Stay with us. For the next 24 hours, the Guardian will be reporting in real time on the wave of climate strikes as they ripple around the world, starting in the Asia-Pacific region and continuing through Europe and Africa before culminating in the Americas. Millions of young people are expected to turn out in more than 3,000 events worldwide in this latest edition of the Fridays For Future strikes. On this occasion, adults have been invited to join in and companies, organisations, trade unions, even churches are expected to join the fray. Our correspondents on the ground will be feeding in with live updates from the world's major metropolises, and we'll be pausing for breath every now and then to consider the bigger picture, the state we're in, the scale of the challenge. The strike kicks off a big week for environmental activism with a major climate action summit at the UN next week and another round of Friday strikes on the 27th. The Guardian will be at these events too.171913falsefalseMaanvi Singh, Mark Oliver, Haroon Siddique, and Naaman ZhouAn estimated quarter of a million people marched in New York to protest government inaction on the climate crisis."For my extinct friends" reads this Mexico City dog's sign.'We do not have voice nor vote... you do' says a pup in Bogota, Colombia.Rico is barking mad about the climate crisis in London."It was important to be part of the fight," said Amazon worker Evan Pulgino.Nick Andrews, a program manager at Amazon, was a chant leader for the climate strike in Seattle.Richmond protesters: "We're here to fight.""Richmond stong, coal is wrong"Tereza Arapiun, an indigenous leader from Pará state attends the climate strike demonstration in Rio de Janeiro.People take part in a Global Climate Strike rally in Bogotá, Colombia.In Bogotá, a dog wears a placard reading, "We do not have voice nor vote... You do."Students protest outside city hall in Miami Beach.Thalita Alves, 20, left, and Gabriela Cunha, 18, from Federal Fluminense University demonstrate Friday on the steps of the state legislature in Rio de Janeiro.Demonstrators hold a "Global strike for climate" banner during a protest on climate change in São Paulo, Brazil.A woman with a placard that reads in Spanish "This is not an ice cream it is your home, take care of it."Swedish teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg arrives at the podium to speak as she takes part during the Climate Strike in New York.Young activists and their supporters hold signs as they march Friday during a Global Climate Strike demonstration in San Francisco.Young activists in San Francisco, California.People march along Reforma Avenue with signs during a climate protest in Mexico CityPeople hold a flag as they take part in a Global Climate Strike rally in Mexico CityCovering Climate NowStudents chant and carry signs on the Boston City Hall Plaza in Boston, Massachusetts.Students cheer during a protest organized by the US Youth Climate Strike outside of Miami Beach City Hall, Miami Beach, FloridaStudent activists gather in Battery Park in lower Manhattan in New YorkHaitian Burris Filburt, right, and another man stand on the extensive damage and destruction in the aftermath of Hurricane Dorian is seen in The Mudd, Great Abaco, Bahamas, September 5, 2019.Amazon's Seattle headquarters in Seattle, Washington, US, January 29, 2018.Zariah, age 7, and Lori SapphireSixteen year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg takes part in a demonstration as part of the Global Climate Strike in lower Manhattan in New York.Crowds of children skipped school to join a global strike against climate change, heeding the rallying cry of teen activist Greta Thunberg and demanding adults act to stop environmental disaster. It was expected to be the biggest protest ever against the threat posed to the planet by climate change.Brazilian Amazonian Indigenous leader Artemisa Xakriaba'I missed bio for this'Foley Square, New YorkCrowds of children skipped school in New York to join the protests - with parental permissionUS President Donald Trump at a press conference at the White House on FridayPeople gather during the global climate strike march at Foley Square in New York.People gather and march during the global climate strike march in Washington, DC.EU civil servants on climate strike in BrusselsFatima Zara Alarakha marches in the climate strike in London.Labour Leader Jeremy Corbyn addresses the crowd during the global climate strike in LondonGreen Party MP Caroline Lucas speaks during today's climate change demonstration in LondonClimate strikers dressed up as Angela Merkel and Donald TrumpChildren from St Michael's C of E primary school in LichfieldPrimary schoolchildren on their way to Lichfield CathedralDie-in at climate strike in Harpur Square in Bedford town centreNellie Jacobs, 10, and her mother, Helen, at the Manchester climate strikeClaude Guyon, dressed as a Brazilian tribal leader, at the Paris climate strike.A 'die-in' led by climate strikers in Middlesborough.Climate strikers in Middlesborough.Lyra Harris, six, protesting outside Downing StreetLena and Ariadni stand in front of the Greek parliament with weeping planet sign.Students take part in the global climate strike of the Fridays for Future movement in Berlin, Germany.Climate protesters demonstrate outside the local government legislature's offices in Johannesburg, South AfricaClimate Strike IndiaLeon Hayton-Twigg (right), with Ossian (left) and Lucas.Global climate strike, Exeter.Global climate strike, Exeter.Global climate strike, Exeter.edinbughl\CartoonPolice remove plastic cordons as trucks and cars wait after climate activists blocked Jannowitz Bridge.First Dog on the MoonMore than 30,000 people rallied in Brisbane.An estimated 80,000 people pack the Domain in Sydney for the climate strike, Australia.A First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.Marching for the climate in Bali.It's a climate emergency! A shop in Singapore closes for the march.A First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.A First Dog on the Moon sketch for the climate strike.They're showing their passion in Lismore.Marchers out in force in Lismore.The crowds gather in Katherine.Walking the walk and talking the talk in Katherine.Taking advantage of some shade in Katherine.Students march for the climate in Katherine."Sponsored post" for the climate strikes.If people want a last minute sign for the climate strike First Dog on the Moon says you can print this out on vegan paper and wave it aboutClimate change strike posters sign along King Street, Newtown.Children from Byron Bay strike to demand action on climate change, 20 September 2019.

Load-Date: September 21, 2019


End of Document




Obama set to utter term 'climate change' in Florida on Earth Day trip; State made headlines for reported rule against using the phrase President says climate change 'can no longer be denied - or ignored'Florida banned state workers from using term 'climate change' - report
The Guardian
April 18, 2015 Saturday 5:56 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS
Length: 599 words
Byline: Martin Pengelly in New York
Body


 Related: Florida official says 'climate change' three times amid rumored ban on use
Announcing an Earth Day trip to Florida on Saturday, President Barack Obama used his weekly address to say "climate change can no longer be denied - or ignored". 
Attitudes to climate change among Republicans and in Florida recently made national news, after it was reported that the state's Department of Environmental Protection had issued an unwritten policy to forbid state workers from using the term.
"We were instructed by our regional administrator that we were no longer allowed to use the terms 'global warming' or 'climate change' or even 'sea-level rise'," a former DEP employee was quoted as saying in a report by the Florida Center for Investigative Reporting. "Sea-level rise was to be referred to as 'nuisance flooding'."
The Florida DEP and the office of the Republican governor, Rick Scott, denied that such a policy existed.
On Wednesday this week, the head of the Florida DEP again said no such ban existed. "Climate change. Climate change. Climate change. There, I said it three times," said Jonathan Steverson, at his confirmation hearing in Tallahassee.
In March, however, the president of the south Florida Audubon society told the Guardian there had been a ban, and that it had probably come "from the top".
Obama, strongly indicating that he will not hesitate to use the controversial term when in the state, said he would visit the Florida Everglades on Wednesday, Earth Day, "to talk about the way that climate change threatens our economy.
"The Everglades is one of the most special places in our country," he continued. "But it's also one of the most fragile. Rising sea levels are putting a national treasure - and an economic engine for the South Florida tourism industry - at risk."
The president added: "2014 was the planet's warmest year on record. Fourteen of the 15 hottest years on record have all fallen in the first 15 years of this century. This winter was cold in parts of our country - as some folks in Congress like to point out - but around the world, it was the warmest ever recorded."
Obama's reference to "some folks in Congress" - a group including Senator James Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican and chair of the Senate committee on the environment who in February brought a snowball into the Senate chamber and who infamously suggested climate change was "the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people" - indicated the fiercely political nature of the battle over climate change.
 Related: Five reasons Florida's Marco Rubio might want to rethink climate change
Florida's junior senator, Marco Rubio, this week announced his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination in 2016. He is among many leading Republican politicians who have said they do not believe climate change is caused by humans. 
"The fact that the climate is changing has very serious implications for the way we live now," Obama said. "Stronger storms. Deeper droughts. Longer wildfire seasons. The world's top climate scientists are warning us that a changing climate already affects the air our kids breathe.
"Last week, the surgeon general and I spoke with public experts about how climate change is already affecting patients across the country. The Pentagon says that climate change poses immediate risks to our national security."
Risking the sounding of what the rest of the word might consider a contentious note, Obama continued: "So climate change can no longer be denied - or ignored. The world is looking to the United States - to us - to lead. And that's what we're doing."

Load-Date: April 18, 2015


End of Document




What do Angry Birds and Mad Max have in common? A climate change message; Climate messages are finding their way into Hollywood blockbusters and addictive games. Is popular culture embracing the reality of climate change?
The Guardian
June 5, 2015 Friday 10:30 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 1041 words
Byline: Adam Corner
Body


In any given 24-hour period, the average urban commuter is subjected to hundreds of corporate advertisements. By contrast, it's easy to make it through the day without hearing a mention of climate change. For all intents and purposes it is invisible in our daily lives, and this invisibility goes a long way towards explaining why the allegedly "defining" challenge of the 21st century barely registers on barometers of popular culture.
Whether it's the addictive melodrama of long-running TV soap-operas, the swirling churn of "trending" topics on social media, or the glamorous high-definition version of reality refracted to us through the lens of Hollywood cameras, climate change is missing in action. 
It was a surprise, then, to find such a high level of chatter about climate change at the glitzy Cannes film festival (not famed for grappling with the world's biggest questions). The festival concluded with Ice & Sky, a sombre take on the work of the French scientist Claude Lorius, documenting the destruction of Antarctic glaciers. Charlize Theron, discussing the forthcoming remake of dystopian classic Mad Max, commented: "What makes [the film] even scarier is that it is something that is not far off if we don't pull it together." 
And it's not just the film industry that has been showing some interest. 
 Related: From antibiotics to fossil fuels: the inconvenient truth about sustainability
On the small screen, the 20 million fans of fantasy-drama Game of Thrones may ostensibly be watching sword fights and violent vengeance. But they're also being told a powerful story about impending ecological destruction - at least, according to a researcher at Arizona State University studying how science blogs have responded to the world-conquering series. And on the even-smaller screen, the maddeningly addictive Angry Birds franchise recently announced it would be integrating a climate change angle in September to coincide with the UN's climate week events. 
So is popular culture finally embracing the reality of a changing climate?
Saci Lloyd, author of The Carbon Diaries, thinks it is. "Climate change is definitely breaking out of the cultural fringes and into mainstream movies and pop. James Cameron has stated that Avatar is a lesson for humankind to stop damaging the environment. Lady Gaga has recently partnered with Vivienne Westwood for the Climate Revolution campaign. And now Pharrell Williams is dropping in on the UN and telling them it's time to go from climate change to climate action. I don't think you can go more pop than that." 
Climate change has traditionally thrived in rarefied spaces (at least in the western world): the complex knowledge chambers of science; the bureaucratic back-channels of international diplomacy; and the minority-interest meetings of specialist campaigns groups. So climate change finding its way out of the highbrow realm and into popular culture at all is grounds for optimism. 
But as ever with climate change, the transition is unlikely to be straightforward. 
 Related: Why pictures of polar bears don't always tell the truth about climate change
Firstly, when compared to other big issues of our time, it's clear that climate change has one unique and problematic characteristic: there is no outside observer uniquely well positioned to narrate the story. Hollywood celebrities - often fairly - take flak for their advocacy around global poverty or human rights abuses. Because of their privileged positions, they may be challenged on their credibility. But we all have a credibility problem when it comes to climate change - because like it or not, we are all complicit. 
And some of us are more complicit than others. Mad Max may tell a cautionary tale about a world ravaged by resource wars, but its own carbon footprint must be mind-bogglingly, extravagantly high. Mainstream cultural channels are, currently, unavoidably high-carbon. This doesn't invalidate Hollywood's voice on climate change, but it is essentially impossible to make a big budget (aka popular) film in anything approaching a sustainable way. Unsurprisingly, research suggests that people have ambivalent views about the contradictions inherent in "eco-celebrities". 
As the British actor Tom Cullen says: "It's a tricky position I find myself in. I'm a climate change advocate but often find my lifestyle at odds with my views. I juggle my guilt and my career. The actor Mark Ruffalo has a strong voice in climate change awareness but has recently completed a round-the-world press tour for The Avengers, and therein lies a problem. How can our most adored and respected be listened to if they are hypocrites? How can we bring climate change into the pop-culture foreground if we deem their argument as illegitimate?" 
Of course, you can entertain people on a village green with a local theatre company using solar-powered lights. The concept of entertainment does not start and finish with pyrotechnics and private jets. But if the mainstream is where climate change needs to be, then this is the reality it will have to grapple with - and it is not hard to see where tensions could arise. 
 Related: BBC, ITV and Sky get green kick up the arts with new sustainability mark
While TV executives don't agree on many things, research by the International Broadcasting Trust has found that they are unanimous in their belief that viewers do not want to be lectured. 
Nick Comer-Calder, of the Climate Media Net, puts it this way: "Climate change themes need to be embedded in long-running series to make it mainstream - to normalise it. I don't think it has to be the whole rationale for a plot - but it needs to be firmly woven in. And it is not just about the science or the impacts, its about the whole complex mechanism of tackling climate change in personal, political, and professional life." 
It is encouraging that the final spot in Cannes was reserved for an eco-documentary, and positive that a game played by millions worldwide sees a place for climate change in its franchise. But the real challenge is to integrate climate change into the juggernaut of popular culture - not drag it alongside in a special sidecar of its own - and this is a much tougher (although ultimately more meaningful) proposition.

Load-Date: June 5, 2015


End of Document




Australia should create 'Pacific visa' to reduce impact of climate change and disaster on islanders
The Guardian (London)
October 21, 2020 Wednesday 5:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 940 words
Byline: Ben Doherty Pacific Editor
Highlight: Displacement is growing in the Asia-Pacific region, and a new policy paper argues migration policies must be established now


Body


Australia should establish a new "Pacific Access" visa category that could be used by Pacific islanders forced from their homes by climate change and natural disasters, a new policy paper has argued, warning of growing displacement in Australia's region in coming decades.
Disasters displaced three times as many people as conflict around the world last year, the paper from University of New South Wales' Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law says, and the Asia-Pacific region is the hardest hit. Between 2008 and 2018, the Asia-Pacific saw more than 80% of all new global displacement.
"Australia cannot afford to ignore the fact that in its own region, internal and cross-border displacement within and from the Pacific islands is likely to increase as disasters intensify and become more frequent, exacerbated by the impacts of climate change," authors Jane McAdam and Jonathan Pryke write.
"While Australia cannot stop such displacement altogether, it can implement policy changes now that would help to reduce its scale and impact."
New Zealand has, for decades, run a Pacific Access Visa category, allowing residents of Kiribati, Tuvalu, Tonga and Fiji to apply to permanently migrate under a ballot system. Residents of Cook Islands, Niue and Tokelau are automatically New Zealand citizens. The Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia and Palau are in 'compacts of free association' with the US, allowing free movement.
The Kaldor policy paper argues for an expansion of Australia's existing seasonal worker program and Pacific labour scheme, and for the creation of a Pacific access-style visa category similar to New Zealand's model. It would be for countries in the Pacific without free movement to other large Pacific rim countries.
Director of the Kaldor Centre, Prof Jane McAdam, said that while Pacific islanders overwhelmingly want to stay in their homes, and their governments were focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation, that migration planning would be needed as part of a "suite of policies" for coming decades.
She said governments around the world, but particularly in the Asia-Pacific, needed to put in place migration policies to allow planned and controlled movement before displacement became acute and forced.
"Policymakers look at this as a future issue, but we are seeing the impacts already driving people to move. These policies are about supporting Pacific islands communities to themselves cope with disasters and climate change. This is not an either-or argument, it's not adaptation and mitigation or migration, we need a suite of policies to address these challenges, and migration can provide an important relief-valve.
"This isn't just about protecting people when it's almost too late, it's about devising proactive policies, including migration policies to let people move now, with safety and with dignity."
Pryke, director of the Lowy Institute's Pacific Islands Program, said beyond the humanitarian and legal arguments in favour of greater Pacific access, Australia was a beneficiary of enhanced migration from the Pacific.
"We benefit greatly from the contribution the Pacific islanders are already making to Australia's economy as seasonal and temporary workers, particularly in the era of Covid-19 where our borders remain shut to other sources of labour."
He said labour migration benefited Pacific economies too, with Pacific labourers in Australia able to earn between eight and 10 times what they could in their home countries: money repatriated directly to families and communities.
"It is economic support directly into communities, to improve livelihoods back in the Pacific."
Other models of pan-Pacific migratory cooperation have previously been mooted.
In 2019, former prime minister Kevin Rudd proposed a " formal constitutional condominium " with Pacific nations, where Australia would offer citizenship to the residents of Tuvalu, Kiribati, and Nauru in exchange for control of their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones, and fisheries.
The idea was not well-received in the Pacific: Tuvalu's then prime minister accused him of "imperial thinking" and said his country would "not to be subjugated under some sort of colonial mentor".
Prof John Blaxland from the ANU proposed Australia establishing a " grand compact " with Kiribati, Tonga, Tuvalu and Nauru: akin to the arrangements the US and New Zealand have with Pacific states.
                     Recruiting Pacific islanders to the Australian defence force - as a pathway to citizenship - has also been proposed.
The Australian government's 2017 foreign policy white paper said Australia would move to "integrate Pacific countries into the Australian and New Zealand economies and our security institutions", arguing it was "essential to the long-term stability and economic prospects of the Pacific". Australia and other allied countries are also concerned about China's rising presence and influence across the region.
Last month, Danielle Heinecke from the department of foreign affairs and trade told a parliamentary inquiry the government was looking at "pathways towards further integration" with Pacific states.
"Typically, we've had an economic response to migration, rather than necessarily a strategic look at migration, so there are a lot of interesting policy questions that government needs to unpack," she said.
"What we really want to do is build on the [Pacific] Step-up and build on a lot of the existing education relationships and labour mobility pathways. We particularly want to use this where we can with micro states, because micro states have fairly small populations of around 140,000."

Load-Date: October 21, 2020


End of Document




#MyClimateQuestions: experts and youth leaders respond - as it happened; School students plan to go on strike in protest against inaction on climate change. Whether you approve of the strike or not, you were invited to submit questions here to be answered by climate experts and young campaigners. This blog is now closed - thanks for being part of #MyClimateQuestions
The Guardian(London)
November 27, 2018 Tuesday 4:36 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:8
Length: 5540 words
Byline: Naaman Zhou
Body


block-time published-time 7.50am GMT 
 Well that was great  
Thank you everyone, this has been one of the most rewarding, illuminating blogs I've had the joy of running. 
Thanks to our panellists: Bill Hare, Simon Holmes à Court, Amanda McKenzie, Laura Sykes and Piper Albrecht. And thanks to my colleague Lisa Cox.  
Most of all, thanks to all of you for your questions. It's our future, and I'm glad we got to discuss it. 
The full answers are below, but here's a list of the best:
    • Should we have a children's commissioner in parliament?
    • How does a windmill work?
    • Why aren't electric cars everywhere?
    • Will the Earth become uninhabitable?
    • Should politicians pass a test on climate?
    • Will the strikes work?
    • What's one thing I can do?
    • What is clean coal?
    • And most importantly - there's still hope !
Thank you for reading, engaging and asking. Hope to see you all again soon.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.50am GMT
block-time published-time 7.33am GMT 
And one last question, from Sunny Adcock :
If I am currently 18, do you think that within my lifetime there is hope of preventing climate change? Realistically what is the best and worse case scenario of what may happen within my lifetime?
  Bill Hare says: 
Yes there definitely is hope.
The best case is getting onto a 1.5C pathway, in which case, by the time you turn 50 scientists might be saying that global warming peaked in the 2040s. By the time you are 100, it could be 1.3C or lower and on the way down. 
The worst case is that by your mid-40s the world has busted through 2C warming and is headed for 3.5C or 4C for your 100th birthday. 
There are quite a few reasons for hope, but it will take hard work and real commitment from our political leaders. We are simply running out of time and every climate scientist I know is saying the same thing. 
One of the big reasons for hope is that people are finally waking up all over the world and calling for action. Secondly the costs of renewable technology, electrical storage, electrical vehicles, renewable hydrogen powered trucks and efficiency in industry, housing are dropping rapidly.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.48am GMT
block-time published-time 7.24am GMT 
And  Amanda McKenzie: 
There are three levels of government in Australia - local, state and national.
At the national level, I believe the Morrison government, like the Turnbull and Abbott governments, has not implemented meaningful policy on climate change. 
At the state government level there is a lot happening. In South Australia, they are on track for 73% renewable energy by 2020 while Queensland has a target of 50% renewable energy by 2030. Victoria has a target of 40% renewable energy by 2025 and the Labor government has pledged to increase this to 50% by 2030.
At the local level there is a lot happening too. From floating solar arrays to electric vehicle charging stations to energy efficiency. For more information check out our report on local action here. 
Together there is now more and more happening across Australia. However, it must all be ramped up into the future.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.30am GMT
block-time published-time 7.24am GMT 
Our second last question. 
From Violeta Zavala-Collin, 10, Harcourt public school.
Is there anything Australian politicians are already doing about climate change? Is it going to be effective?
 Simon Holmes à Court  answers first: 
Australian politicians have at times been very constructive and also very destructive in their response to climate change.
For example, in 2001 the Australian government passed laws requiring more renewable energy in our grid. This level, called the renewable energy target, was increased in 2009. As a result, the amount of renewable energy will increase from 9% in 2001 to around 33% in 2020. 
In 2012 the government passed laws that encouraged polluters to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions. These laws were very effective and our emissions started to fall, but in 2014 the laws were undone and emissions have been rising ever since.
In order to avoid dangerous climate change, almost every country in the world is signed up to the Paris Agreement. We are too - but experts say our target is not strong enough, and worse, even the government's experts say we're not even going to hit our targets.
Australia has done quite a bit in the past, but in my opinion, our government does not currently have a real plan to respond to the climate challenge.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.29am GMT
block-time published-time 7.20am GMT 
From Oli, aged 8: 
How can we build buildings that can help us respond to climate change?
 Simon Holmes à Court: 
We can look at this two ways.
First, what can we do to reduce the impact our buildings have on the planet? We can choose building materials, like sustainably farmed timber, and orient the house to maximise winter sun and minimise the need for heating and cooling. 
We can make the buildings more energy efficient, by using LED light bulbs, double-glazed windows and good insulation. We can make sure all our appliances have high energy ratings and we can put solar hot water and solar photovoltaic panels on the roof. This reduces the climate impact of our homes, and the house will cost a lot less money to run.
Second, we must accept that a certain amount of climate change is locked in. Bushfires are now more severe and costal flooding more likely. When we build houses we must be aware of the changed and changing conditions. As an example, a suburb of Melbourne is changing the planning code to require that no bedrooms are on the ground floor in areas that are newly considered as flood-prone.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.23am GMT
block-time published-time 7.19am GMT 
Some great feedback. Thank you to everyone for some incredible questions, and an inspiring level of curiosity and passion.
enltrOverheard in the newsroom: "That's what I love about this blog, it's kids stating the bloody obvious." #myclimatequestions           https://t.co/mw2vuCEfzo
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 27, 2018
block-time published-time 7.12am GMT 
From Violet, age 6:
How does a windmill work? 
     'People have built windmills to catch energy for more than 1,500 years.' Photograph: Olga Baldock Photography/Getty Images   
 Simon Holmes à Court: 
There is great energy in the wind - think of sailboats being pushed across oceans or storms powerful enough to uproot trees. 
People have built windmills to catch the energy and do something useful with it for more than 1,500 years. Early on it was often used to pump water or to mill grain into flour. In the 1880s inventors started converting the energy to electricity as people started to install lights in their homes. 
In the 1970s inventors started working on what we now call wind turbines. Modern wind turbines have a tall tower with a small building on top called a nacelle. The nacelle is about the size of a caravan, attached to which are three massive blades. The blades can weigh more than 10 tonnes and be longer than 50m and are a little bit like aeroplane wings. 
The nacelle contains motors that turn the blades too face the wind. As the blades catch the wind, they turn, driving a generator in the nacelle. The generator converts the movement into electricity, before being added to our power grid. As I write, 7% of the power in our national grid is coming from wind turbines, which is very close to the average over the past year.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.17am GMT
block-time published-time 7.06am GMT 
Also apologies to everyone if your question hasn't been answered yet. Our experts are wrapping up, but we'll still run the blog until 6.30, and have plenty of questions and answers still to work through. Stick with us! 
block-time published-time 7.05am GMT 
Another question from Cranbrook School, from year 7 student Thomas Girle:
 How does climate change affect water scarcity in different areas? 
 Amanda McKenzie: 
Great question as water is a big issue in Australia.
South-east Australia has already experienced a 15% decline in late autumn and early winter rainfall, and a 25% decline in average rainfall in April and May over the past two to three decades. This area includes major population centres of Brisbane, Sydney, Canberra, Melbourne and Adelaide. 
South-western Australia has also experienced a long-term drying trend including a more than 50% decline in streamflow. Across the Murry-Darling Basin - the food bowl of Australia - streamflows have declined by 41% since the 1990s. 
For more info check out our water security report here.
     The outfall weir at a now empty Menindee Lakes NSW. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.09am GMT
block-time published-time 6.58am GMT 
 Should we have a children's commissioner in parliament?  
A great question from Samuel Turrin
Do you think people below the voting age should have a voice in parliament on issues that would directly impact their future? How could we do this?
 Piper Albrecht,  17, has some ideas:
I think optional voting for children 16 to 18 would be a good idea. Then they would have a say in who is in the parliament making decisions that impact them.
Maybe they could also have a children's commissioner in parliament. This could be a politician who voices the concerns of the young people. Young people could then direct their concerns to that person. 
Politicians could look more closely at what children are doing and show that they're listening to them. For example, if the children are striking maybe they should start listening and responding to the children's specific requests, rather than just being defensive.
And Laura Sykes:  
I 100% think people below the voting age should have a voice in parliament. There are so many challenges young people are facing right now - climate change, unemployment, the housing crisis, mental health and cost of living. 
What has become obvious is that our politics is stuck in three year cycles and in doing so, is not able to deal with a long-term issue which needs serious planning and great long-term ambition, like climate change.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.02am GMT
block-time published-time 6.53am GMT 
Another video question, from Rhys Kimberley from Cranbrook School.
If we were to move right now into renewable energy, what impact would that have on economical, environmental and political aspects of Australia?"
 Simon Holmes à Court: 
We can't move to renewable energy overnight. It will take time - a decade if we are fast, decades longer if we don't try very hard. 
Economic modelling prepared over the past decade has consistently shown that the costs of aggressively reducing emissions are manageable - certainly much more manageable than the economic impact of unchecked climate change. 
There are two kinds of environmental benefits. In the short term we'll reduce a range of pollutants from the air that have been shown recently cause an estimated 279 deaths a year from NSW's coal-fired power stations alone.
In the medium term, if Australia acts on reducing CO2 emissions and is joined by a strong global response, we can avert a massive environmental disaster.
Politically? For the past couple of decades Australian politicians have been fighting about renewables and carbon emissions. As more and more of the public understand renewables, have jobs in the industry, have solar panels on their roof, and prices continue to fall, I believe the toxic politics will fade away.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.58am GMT
block-time published-time 6.49am GMT 
From Callum, aged 8: 
This spring has been really cold. Is that something to do with climate change?
 Bill Hare 
I don't think so, it could just be natural variability. Differences year from year that always occurred and can be quite extreme in some places! 
Over much of the country, spring has been warmer than average, and the weather bureau is predicting a hot summer in large parts of Australia. On the west coast it definitely felt a bit cooler than usual, at least around the Perth.
There may be some link to the change in the temperature of the sea surface, affected by human-induced warming, but this will take a fair bit of research to work out.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.57am GMT
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
 Why aren't electric cars everywhere?  
Max, 14, asks:
Why are electric cars not everywhere yet? My family say they want one but they are still a bit too expensive. 
 Simon Holmes à Court  has the answer - they are expensive, but that should be getting better. 
Electric cars might seem very new, but some of the first cars ever made were fully electric, including the Flocken's Elektrowagen of 1888, but within 20 years the industry had moved over almost entirely to engines burning fossil fuels.
Thanks to massive advances in battery technology, inventors began working on electric vehicles again almost 100 years later. Mass production vehicles only arrived in Australia recently, the best selling Nissan Leaf in 2011 and the next best seller, the Tesla Model S, has only been here for four years.
Electric cars are cheap to run - there's a lot less to maintain and the electricity needed to charge them is much cheaper than the cost of the equivalent amount of fuel. However, they are currently considerably more expensive to purchase.
The costs will come down as production increases - right now electric cars make up around 1.5% of all new cars, but this number is growing very quickly. We could give electric cars preferential access to express lanes, build more charge stations or provide a rebate.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.56am GMT
block-time published-time 6.41am GMT 
A quick break for some news, the Senate just voted to show solidarity and support for the striking students. 
enltrThe Senate just voted for a motion to support the #ClimateStrike and call for the government to have a climate policy! Thanks to everyone who stood on the right side of history, everyone else can get stuffed.            pic.twitter.com/hSibdpncAO
 - School Strike 4 Climate (@StrikeClimate) November 27, 2018
block-time published-time 6.30am GMT 
From Gracie, 10, from Hobart: 
How do we get people to understand that they must stop flying?
 Bill Hare  says we shouldn't stop people flying, but there are other options.
As with all good things, one can have too much. While we would not probably want to stop people from flying, there is a lot that can be done to significantly reduce emissions. 
Flying is around 2% to 3% of global greenhouse gas emissions and growing quickly. Projected efficiency increases in aircraft, impressive as they might be, are not sufficient to reduce emissions, so we need to change the fuel source to low, and ultimately zero, carbon sources. 
Fortunately there are options available. A lot of work has been done on making jet fuel from biomass and ensuring that this is safe. The international renewable energy agency, Irena, has produced very interesting reports on how this can be done - what is needed are the right price signals and incentives, which need to be set by government. 
We are also seeing other technologies including battery-powered aircraft, and renewable hydrogen fuel cell powered aircraft being tested at small scale. 
I don't think that biomass jet fuel is the final answer here, because there will be other sustainability concerns. But Australia could play a leading role in all of these areas.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.59am GMT
block-time published-time 6.22am GMT 
 Will the Earth become uninhabitable?  
A question from Twitter:
enltrEvan (year 6) would like to know how long until the earth becomes uninhabitable for humans if we don't do anything #MyClimateQuestions
 - Kate Morton (@V8kate) November 27, 2018
 Bill Hare replies:
This is a big question. I would say it's unlikely that global warming will make the planet uninhabitable for humans but it will wipe out a lot of species and ecosystems. 
If we don't reduce emissions soon then deadly heat waves, which may make entire regions uninhabitable could be occurring by the end of the century in Asia, the Middle East and parts of northern Africa. 
Even more important is this does not have to happen. The world scientific community has shown that if we crack on and start reducing emissions quickly we can avoid nearly all of these problems completely.
And another reply to Lily's question earlier:
enltrHi Lily! You can tell your bank to stop funding fossil fuels: https://t.co/erxlvivrm0           @GuardianAus           #MyClimateQuestions           pic.twitter.com/ks3VyiDIF3
 - Market Forces (@market_forces) November 27, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.25am GMT
block-time published-time 6.18am GMT 
 Another question from Eva: 
If the population was reduced, what effect would that have on climate change?
 Amanda McKenzie: 
There are two things to consider, one how much each person consumes and two how many people there are consuming. In the rich world, like Australia, on average an individual consumes a LOT. If the whole world consumed as much as we do we'd be in a lot of trouble. 
So we need to consume more responsibly and start transitioning our idea of waste. The Earth is a closed system so nothing is ever truly thrown away. The other thing to mention is that educating and empowering women and girls around the world to have more control over their own destiny is the best way to tackle the population issue.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.19am GMT
block-time published-time 6.15am GMT 
Onto politics, and year 11 student George Daley has another question:
I would like to know if Labor's recently announced energy policy goes far enough to help prevent climate change, as I have seen it receive both praise and criticism.
 Bill Hare: 
On the one hand the policy package is far ahead of what the government is offering, so there is a sense of relief that at last there is a policy that looks like something might happen. 
On the other hand, we know that coal-fired power stations need to be phased out of Australia by around 2030, and that renewable energy needs to be ramped up much faster than is implied in the National Energy Guarantee package. 
The renewable energy target put forward by the ALP for the electricity sector is only a few percent more than the Australian Energy Market Operator is projecting for 2030. The economy-wide target of a 45% reduction by 2030 (from 2005 levels) is also barely sufficient to be compliant with the Paris Agreement.
Finally the ambiguity the ALP has on how much the power sector should do raises questions. They need to do a lot more than a 45% reduction in order for the rest of the whole economy to do a 45% reduction.
     Opposition leader Bill Shorten Photograph: Lisa Maree Williams/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.20am GMT
block-time published-time 6.06am GMT 
 Will the strikes work?  
 Caitlin Ross asks:
Do you think these strikes directly will make politicians take action on climate change?
 Laura Sykes: 
What's been incredible about the strikes is it shows young people are so frustrated with the lack of action on climate change from our politicians, that they will do whatever it takes to make their voices heard.
If students as young as 8 can understand the impacts of fossil fuels on our climate, it's no longer acceptable that our politicians are listening to fossil fuel companies over the experts and young people. 
These students are taking such a brave action to strike, and if politicians still refuse to act, they will lose all credibility with young people. We have seen that climate change can shift votes, as happened in Wentworth and the Victorian election, and in the lead up to the federal election, politicians will have no choice but to act.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.12am GMT
block-time published-time 6.05am GMT 
We're trending!
enltr***New Trend Alert*** 1. #MyClimateQuestions2. Liberal MP 3. Federal Court 4. Minister 5. Parliament House 6. Nauru 7. deepwater 8. Malcolm Turnbull 9.            #ARIAs
 - TrendWiki Australia (@TrendWikiAU) November 27, 2018
block-time published-time 6.00am GMT 
Peter asks: 
My name is Peter. I'm in year 2, and I would like to know how and will climate change affect us in Australia?
 Amanda McKenzie,  CEO of the Climate Council responds: 
Hi Peter,
There are a number of ways that climate change will affect us and here are two.
1. It is getting hotter. That means that we are seeing more heatwaves and extremely hot days. Hot weather can be lovely, but when it is really hot or hot for long periods of time it can be bad for people's health and the health of animals and plants
2. In southern Australia, in places like Melbourne and Adelaide, it is getting drier. There is less rain falling which means that droughts and bushfires are happening more often. Drought is tough for farmers as it is harder to grow crops and to look after farm animals. Drought is also tough in cities and towns because there is less water for houses and businesses. Bushfires are scary and can cause a lot of damage.
The good news is that we can tackle climate change together. We need to change to clean energy, like solar panels and wind farms.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.26am GMT
block-time published-time 5.56am GMT 
enltrWe think that the parliament should have to pass a climate science test. The bare minimum should be for our politicians to have a basic understanding of climate change. #myclimatequestions           pic.twitter.com/LvonVCpfTm
 - AYCC (@AYCC) November 27, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.57am GMT
block-time published-time 5.51am GMT 
 Jacqueline O'Connor asks:
Just how bad is the damage to the ozone layer?
 Bill Hare: 
Quite bad but the signs are that it is beginning to recover. The recovery, and the reason it did not get a lot worse, is because the world acted quickly to first freeze and then phase out the ozone-destroying chemicals that were causing the problem. Vigilance is still needed, especially as climate change effects in the stratosphere seem likely to slow down the recovery.
     How bad is the damage to the ozone layer? Bill Hare says 'Quite bad but it's beginning to recover.' Photograph: Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.13am GMT
block-time published-time 5.46am GMT 
 Should politicians pass a test on climate?  
 Adrienne Allen asks:
Do you think candidates for parliament should be able to pass a test on their knowledge about the carbon cycle and the climate? 
 Piper Albrecht : 
Hi Adrienne,
That's a good question about politicians having to take a test on their carbon competency. It's a bit scary to think that people can be making decisions about the climate even if they don't know anything about the science behind it. 
And given that the science is pretty clear that we need stop producing carbon emissions, it would make sense for politicians to know at least a bit about it. Some investors now expect to be able to quiz board members of companies about their climate change knowledge before they will invest. 
And politicians are making decisions that are not just about money, but are about our future in a safe climate. That's even more important than money, I think.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.13am GMT
block-time published-time 5.38am GMT 
And two more from Eva, also answered by Laura Sykes 
Is it possible to live our lives as they are today and still reduce climate change?
"The short answer is no. 
"The rate at which the Earth's natural resources are currently being consumed is not only unsustainable (as in, we'll run out of these resources) but the type of resources we're consuming (oil, gas, coal) is having shocking consequences on the Earth and exacerbating climate change. 
"So in order to tackle climate change, we do need to make a change rapidly, but with proper planning to make sure that communities are not left behind in the transition, and there is a plan for jobs in the renewable energy sector for people. 
"We need to start making these plans and taking action now, as we know we only have 12 years before we reach the threshold of 2C, which will have irreversible impacts on people and the planet."
What is the psychology behind climate change denial?
"Climate change is an overwhelming existential problem and I think we can all understand why people would be scared of the implications of climate change. 
"I think fear presents itself in many different ways and psychologists who have studied climate change denial suggest that it's easier to look at extreme weather events as a random isolated incident rather than a changing and terrifying future. It's easier to think evidence of climate change is freak one-off event rather than a new norm which leads to much bigger questions about our impacts on the Earth."
Those of you commenting have also asked a similar question: 
stopthegoats           27 November 2018 5:04am  This comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate   
My question is why seemingly reasonable people accept science in other aspects of their lives but choose to ignore climate science.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.19am GMT
block-time published-time 5.31am GMT 
A great question from Eva in year 8 at Glenunga international high school in Adelaide
What is your opinion on Australia's role in climate change?
 Laura Sykes from the AYCC:
Australia is one of the largest exporters of coal and gas in the world, and also the windiest and sunniest continent on the planet.
This means that Australia has an incredible opportunity to lead the way when it comes to moving beyond all fossil fuels, and transitioning to 100% renewable energy.
Right now however, I think our politicians are listening to big corporations and fossil fuel companies over the voices of young people.
     Mount Majura solar farm in Canberra. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.13am GMT
block-time published-time 5.22am GMT 
 What's one thing I can do?  
Our first video question is from Lily. 
What is one thing I can do right now as an individual to help slow down climate change?
 Piper Albrecht, Year 11, responds: 
Hi Lily, 
I think that the best thing you can do right now to help slow climate change is to talk to a politician. The more they hear people telling them to take climate change seriously, the more they'll be inclined to do something about this problem. 
And ride your bike! It doesn't cost anything, it doesn't use any fossil fuels, and it's freedom!
Keep up the good work!
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.26am GMT
block-time published-time 5.12am GMT 
If you're confused - the IPCC report Bill mentioned is the world's leading climate report, and is put together by the UN. 
It warned we have 12 years to start taking action, if we want to keep warming below 1.5C. 
After 2C, it will have long-lasting effects on our climate that we might not be able to reverse. 
A later report said we are " nowhere near on track" to reach that target, and the world probably warm by at least 2C by then. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.15am GMT
block-time published-time 5.09am GMT 
And a follow-up from George: 
What kind of message do you think our government's climate policy sends to neighbours that are pursuing a progressive approach to climate policy, or considering it? 
 Bill Hare : 
I think right now the federal government's policy is sending a very bad signal to Pacific Island neighbours, and I know many leaders in the region who are very concerned about Australia's position on climate change and cannot understand why Australia is not taking this seriously.
The recent announcement by the prime minister that Australia would not replenish its contribution to the Green Climate Fund, which Australia played a very positive role in establishing, has also sent a very discouraging signal to many developing countries.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.16am GMT
block-time published-time 5.06am GMT 
From George Daley, Year 11 student from Queensland: 
 The IPCC Special Report outlined measures to take to prevent a climate catastrophe. 
Do you think the already drastic recommendations of the report are enough, or should the government have an even more extensive policy?
Climate scientist Bill Hare  says: 
The IPCC's measures are in general adequate, but the safest are those that focus on high energy efficiency, phase out coal, oil and gas the fastest, and bring in renewables most rapidly. 
These are safest because they have the least reliance on negative CO2 emissions technologies - we are not sure these will work at the scale required - and also the best chance of keeping warming to a peak of 1.5C and reducing it to 1.3C or lower by 2100. 
Apart from getting Australia on the right track domestically the most important task for an Australian government internationally is to help persuade countries moving towards zero carbon as fast as possible. We cannot do this if we haven't begun to clean up our own act.
We also need to have a strategy to phase out our fossil fuel exports, and phase-in exporting renewable energy, for example, green hydrogen. This means we need a new diplomatic strategy as well.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.15am GMT
block-time published-time 4.59am GMT 
 What is clean coal?  
Our first question is from Robert Dawson.
 What is clean coal? Does it exist? 
Here is Simon Holmes à Court: 
In my opinion, 'clean coal' is not more real than 'healthy cigarettes'. When politicians say 'clean coal' they typically mean one of two things:
1. A coal power station fitted with carbon capture and storage (CCS). 
This technology separates carbon dioxide from the power station's exhaust, and either stores it underground or uses it for something else. Once heralded as the solution for climate change, only two relatively small projects were ever built. Together they capture 0.001% of the CO2 emitted by the world's coal power stations, and unfortunately, in both cases the CO2 is used for oil extraction, resulting in even more emissions. 
No major coal CCS projects are being built. A 2017 government audit report was very critical of the lack of value received for the approximately $1bn invested in the technology in Australia.
     A coal-fired power station in the Latrobe Valley, Victoria. Photograph: Ashley Cooper/Getty Images    
2. Coal power stations using higher temperature steam.
These are sometimes called "high efficiency, low emissions" or HELE power stations. 
These are not highly efficient, not low emissions, not new technology and not cheap. It'd be more honest to call them "slightly lower emissions, more expensive". 
Australia has four HELE power stations, which on average are 10% lower emissions than their non-HELE counterparts, but still higher emitting that even diesel generators!
enltrjust a reminder that the "cleanest" coal is dirtier than diesel - and diesel is high emissions. pic.twitter.com/WSr8OmnCaZ
 - simon holmes à court (@simonahac) August 28, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.26am GMT
block-time published-time 4.49am GMT 
Before we begin, here are some thoughts from Greta Thunberg, a 15-year old from Sweden who leaves school every week to protest climate change.
I first learnt about climate change when I was eight years old. I learnt that this was something humans had created ...
We are running out of time. Failure means disaster. The changes required are enormous and we must all contribute to the solutions, especially those of us in rich countries like Australia.
The adults have failed us. And since most of them, including the press and the politicians, keep ignoring the situation, we must take action into our own hands, starting today.
 Related:  I'm striking from school to protest inaction on climate change - you should too | Greta Thunberg
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.54am GMT
block-time published-time 4.39am GMT 
 Our panel  
Here's who you will be speaking to today. 
They are a mix of students, young people and older adults. They're experts on everything - from electric cars to social media campaigns. Ask away. 
    • Piper Albrecht - Year 11 student at Castlemaine Secondary School
    • Bill Hare - climate scientist and expert on international climate treaties
    • Amanda McKenzie - CEO of the Climate Council, co-founder of Australian Youth Climate Coalition
    • Simon Holmes à Court - Energy and economics expert
    • Laura Sykes - Schools co-ordinator of the Australian Youth Climate Council
block-time published-time 4.35am GMT 
 Hello and welcome  
Hi everyone and welcome to My Climate Questions.
I'm Naaman and I'll be moderating today's blog. Guardian Australia's environment reporter Lisa Cox and I will be the bridge between your questions and our experts.
If you're a school student or young Australian, this is your place for the next two hours to talk, learn, and ask about everything you want to know about climate change. 
Questions can be super tricky, or super easy. Ask about that one thing you've always been confused about. There are no bad questions. 
We'll be posting the first ones in 30 minutes. Start thinking and write in. 
Email questions to myclimatequestions@theguardian.com, or tweet or post to Instagram using #myclimatequestions (only do the last two if you're over 13). 
If you have thoughts - comment below, email me (naaman.zhou@theguardian.com) or tweet me (@ naamanzhou ). This isn't just a way to talk to adults, but a place to discuss our shared future. I'm looking forward to it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am GMT

Load-Date: November 27, 2018


End of Document




Coalition inaction on climate change and health is risking Australian lives, global report finds; Urgent national action is needed to prevent serious declines in public health from climate change, the multi-institutional Countdown study says
The Guardian(London)
November 13, 2019 Wednesday 11:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 1100 words
Byline: Melissa Davey
Body


 The federal government's lack of engagement on health and climate change has left Australians at significant risk of illness through heat, fire and extreme weather events, and urgent national action is required to prevent harm and deaths, a global scientific collaboration has found.
On Thursday, international medical journal the Lancet published its Countdown report, a multi-institutional project led by University College in London that examines progress on climate change and health throughout the world.
Its first two assessments were published in 2017 and 2018, with annual assessments continuing until 2030, consistent with the near-term timeline of the Paris climate agreement. Findings relating to Australia were tracked and published by the Medical Journal of Australia.
Australia was assessed across 31 indicators divided into five broad sections: climate change impacts, exposures and vulnerability; adaptation, planning and resilience for health; mitigation actions and health co-benefits; finance and economics; and public and political engagement.
The report found that while there had been some progress at state and local government levels, "there continues to be no engagement on health and climate change in the Australian federal parliament, and Australia performs poorly across many of the indicators in comparison to other developed countries; for example, it is one of the world's largest net exporters of coal and its electricity generation from low-carbon sources is low".
"We also find significantly increasing exposure of Australians to heatwaves and, in most states and territories, continuing elevated suicide rates at higher temperatures," wrote the authors, led by Associate Professor Paul Beggs of Macquarie University's Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences.
"As a direct result of this failure, we conclude that Australia remains at significant risk of declines in health due to climate change, and that substantial and sustained national action is urgently required in order to prevent this ... This work is urgent."
Spokeswoman for Doctors for the Environment Australia, Dr Arnagretta Hunter, agreed Australia was poorly prepared for the health challenge of climate change.
"Doctors around Australia are already seeing multiple health effects from climate change," Hunter, a cardiologist, said. "On the coast of NSW this week we know there are more respiratory illnesses, heart attacks and strokes as a consequence of the terrible air pollution from the fires. Doctors see the mental health effects of drought in rural communities. Patterns of infectious diseases are changing.
"Average summer temperatures in Australia have risen by 1.66C in the past 20 years, with the intensity of heatwaves rising by a third. And with the increasing temperatures over summer we know there has been increased hospital admissions with ill health. Mortality rates are also affected."
In 2014, Melbourne experienced temperatures over 41C from 14 to 17 January, as well as 167 excess deaths and a new record set for the highest number of calls for ambulance services ever received in a day, she said. Hunter described Australia as the developed country with the most serious vulnerability to climate change through heat, fire, water shortages and extreme weather events.
"Doctors for the Environment Australia joins the loud chorus across Australia calling for the federal government to acknowledge the risk and act in proportion to the magnitude of the threat," she said.
In 2019, the Australian Medical Association, Doctors for the Environment Australia and the World Medical Association recognised climate change as a health emergency.
Public Health Association of Australia senior policy officer Dr Ingrid Johnston said the priorities of the fossil fuel industry had been placed ahead of the health of Australians.
"No one can dispute that climate change poses significant immediate, medium-term and long-term risks to the health of Australians and communities around the world," she told Guardian Australia. "And yet the government appears to believe that climate change is not a mainstream health issue. This is tragically wrong. The issues cannot be siloed."
She called on the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to issue a statement unambiguously acknowledging the link between climate change and health.
Johnston said the activities of the federal government's disaster and climate resilience reference group - a group of senior officials which considers the risks and opportunities arising from climate change and natural disasters - had not been transparent in its work.
"The public has a right to know what that working group is doing," she said. "How much information is the government giving consideration to regarding climate impacts in national assessments of health?
"Australians are crying out for genuine, smart and empathetic national leadership. The above cannot happen without a well-resourced and national effort to reduce future threat levels from fires and drought."
She said the Public Health Association of Australia wanted a Coag health and climate change forum consisting of ministers with responsibility for health, environment, energy and other portfolios.
"No area is untouched by climate change," Johnston said. "This Coag working group would incorporate academic expertise on how to adapt the health system to a changing climate with more natural disasters, with adequate funding for proposals. The sniping politics has to stop so we can get on with working for health and the national interest.
"Finally, we call out the policy that does exist. It is a policy that places the fossil fuel industry above the health and wellbeing of all Australians. It backs subsidies for fossil fuels and subverts tough environmental planning for mines and gas projects."
General practitioner Dr Peter Tait, who also has a master's degree in climate change and is involved with health and environmental groups, said there was no mechanism in the national health system to collect information about climate-related illnesses other than in a random or anecdotal way.
"Even in emergency departments where the severe end of these conditions go, data collection is dependent on the treating doctor using a code to identify heat stress or natural disaster effects, and apart from the obvious ones, like burns, they don't," he said.
"We do know that the mental health toll from destructive fires and other natural disasters will be high. This is a supernatural disaster occasioned by decades of purposeful neglect by governments and as that dawns on people, anger and distress will rise."

Load-Date: November 13, 2019


End of Document




Why it's good to laugh at climate change; Climate gags are notable by their absence, but an RSA event on Tuesday night hopes to show that climate change comedy can raise laughs and awareness
The Guardian
January 20, 2015 Tuesday 4:15 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 774 words
Byline: Adam Corner
Body


Did you hear the one about the climate policy analyst? Or the polar bear who walked into a bar?
Climate change is not generally considered a source of amusement: in terms of comedic material, the forecast is an ongoing cultural drought. But perhaps campaigners have missed a trick in overlooking the powerful role that satire and subversion can play in social change. Could humour cut through the malaise that has smothered the public discourse, activating our cultural antennae in a way that graphs, infographics and images of melting ice could never do?
This is the challenge that a panel of British comedians, including Marcus Brigstocke - a seasoned climate humourist, will take up at an event on Tuesday evening hosted by the RSA and the Climate Outreach and Information Network in London (the event is fully booked but it will be streamed live online ). Maybe laughing about something as serious as climate change is just another form of denial. But perhaps its relative absence from the comedy realm is another warning sign: despite decades of awareness raising, the cultural footprint of climate change is faint, fragile and all-too-easily ignored.
The first example of a climate-policy parody was probably the ' Cheat Neutral ' project: a slick spoof of the logic of carbon offsetting whereby people could pay someone else to be faithful, giving them the opportunity to cheat on their husband or wife. And there have other good video mockeries - including one warning that wind farms will blow the Earth off-orbit - which have captured the comedy potential of bizarre debates about energy policy.
This year, Greenpeace teamed up with the surreal comedian Reggie Watts to promote the idea of a 100% renewably powered internet. There have been sporadic examples of climate change ' stand-up '. And the ever-reliable Simpsons has been occasionally willing to engage.
But these are the exceptions that prove the rule: for the most part, climate gags are notable by their absence.
An ongoing challenge is the polarised nature of the climate debate, with climate scepticism closely pegged to political ideology. According to Nick Comer-Calder, of the Climate Media Net, getting people laughing is a good first step to getting them talking - even across political divides. One analysis found that major US satirists, such as Jon Stewart and Steven Colbert, have given more coverage to climate change than many of the news channels - although admittedly, this is a pretty low bar to clear.
But while online ridicule directed towards climate 'deniers' (generally portrayed as either too stupid to understand the science, or as conspiracy theorists) may appeal to the usual crowd, its hard to see how this kind of approach will breach the political divide. After all, the feeling of being laughed at by a sneering, left-leaning elite is not appealing. One notorious attempt by the 10:10 campaign and director Richard Curtis at 'humorously' marginalising opposition towards environmentalism backfired completely. It turns out that most people don't find graphic depictions of children's heads exploding all that hilarious after all...
What's required is for climate change to seep into the fabric of satirical and humourous TV programming, in the same way that other 'current affairs' often provide the backdrop and context for creative output. Jokes 'about' climate change can in fact be 'about' any of the dozens of subjects - family disputes over energy bills, travel and tourism, or changing consumer habits - that are directly impacted by climate change.
Its an interesting irony that while the 'pro-climate' discourse can often feel po-faced and pious, climate sceptics have wasted no time in parodying the climate community. The Heretic, a play by Richard Bean, built its dramatic tension around the conflict between a sceptical climate scientist and her cynical departmental head who is suppressing her data in order to keep his grants flowing. The characters are overdrawn and instantly recognisable. And, as a result, it works: it is good drama, entertaining, and laugh-out-loud funny.
While climate change itself is never going to be a barrel of laughs, we seem to be suffering from a collective lack of imagination in teasing out the tragi-comic narratives that climate change surely provides.
Thinking harder about how to plug climate change into our cultural circuits - not as 'edutainment' but simply as a target of satire in its own right - will be crucial in overcoming the social silence around the issue. The science-communicators don't seem to be making much progress with the public: maybe its time to let the comedians have their turn.

Load-Date: January 20, 2015


End of Document




Acting on climate change can get us out of recession. There are no excuses left
The Guardian (London)
October 17, 2020 Saturday 8:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Version:1
Length: 683 words
Byline: Greg Jericho
Highlight: The IMF says we can increase economic growth over the next 15 years and decrease emissions to net zero by 2050


Body


Seven years ago this week the Abbott government released the exposure draft of legislation to "repeal the carbon tax". It was also the same week that documents from an IPCC report  suggested climate change could cause deaths from heatwaves in Sydney to triple over next 70 years.
October is generally not a good month for news on climate change.
Two years ago, another IPCC report in October suggested we had just 12 years to keep global warming to just 2C above the pre-industrial level - and that was if we started straight away.
It barely rated a mention in the federal election held seven months later.
This week has also delivered bad news: Nasa announced that September was the hottest September on record, and a new study found the Great Barrier Reef has more than halved in size over the past 25 years.
It feels like we have reached the point where such things wash over us now without care or concern. Another temperature record, another bushfire season, another US supreme court justice nominee not willing to say if she agrees with the science.
And it is easy to ignore climate change in the midst of a pandemic and economic recession.
                     Graph not appearing? View here                   
But acting remains imperative and this week, in its latest world economic outlook, the IMF revealed that acting on climate change will actually help us deal with the recession.
Acting on climate change boosts growth in the short term and massively prevents economic destruction later.
The outlook noted that at the current rate, global temperatures will increase "well above the safe levels agreed to in the Paris agreement, raising the risk of catastrophic damage for the planet."
It estimated that on a business-as-usual approach, temperatures are likely to reach 5C above the pre-industrial average by 2095 - in 75 years' time.
Given the aim is to limit warming to just 2C, 5C is something you don't want to have to contemplate.
                     It means frequent year-long droughts, southern Europe looking like the Sahara desert, and billions of people migrating closer to the poles to find hospitable areas.
Catastrophic.
But that is far off in time, so let's make it more manageable and personal.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, can note that by the time his youngest child reaches Dad's current age of 52, the IMF estimates temperatures will be more than 3.2C above pre-industrial averages.
Oh well, at least they'll always have memories of that time he made a chicken coop for the cameras.
But the IMF report is not all doom and gloom - it actually proposes a way out.
And would you believe it, it is the very thing Australia already had in place before the Abbott government committed its act of economic and environmental vandalism.
Yes, a price on carbon.
The IMF proposes a price that starts at between US$6 and US$20 a ton of CO2 and reaches between US$40 and US$150 in 2050.
For reference, the last year of the carbon price here was $24.15.
The IMF estimates it will knock back annual GDP growth by a touch over 2% by the end of the decade. But here's the thing, the IMF also suggests environmental measures that will boost economic growth.
It proposes an "80% subsidy rate on renewables production and a 10-year green public investment program" of 1% of GDP - so roughly $20bn a year for Australia.
Combined with transfers to lower income households to counteract the impact of the carbon price, the IMF estimates this package will actually increase annual economic growth over the next 15 years by about 0.7% of global GDP and decrease emissions to net zero by 2050.
Yes, increase growth and decrease emissions.
And it will also keep temperatures below 3C, and in a best case below 2C.
No, it is not easy or "cheap". Those political parties arguing that some rinky-dink policy such as Direct Action, which cost $2.3bn over three years, will be enough are just charlatans.
We need a price on carbon, and we need massive investment. Together they can prevent catastrophic climate change while also getting us out of a recession.
Win-win. And no political party has any excuse not to act.

Load-Date: October 17, 2020


End of Document




Does climate change exist? The Senate is about to let us know; An amendent to the Keystone XL pipeline bill hopes to force Republican climate change deniers to state whether they agree with the science or not
The Guardian
January 15, 2015 Thursday 6:32 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 912 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg, US environment correspondent
Body


Congress is to vote on whether climate change is real. Seriously.
The measure, which will come up in the debate about the Keystone XL pipeline, will ask the Senate to vote on whether climate change is real, caused by human activities, and has already caused devastating problems in the US and around the world.
It is intended to force Republicans who deny the existence of climate change - and they are a majority in Congress - to own their anti-science positions, said Bernie Sanders, the Independent senator from Vermont behind the amendment. 
"The bottom line is that I think as a nation that we walk down a very dangerous road when the majority party in the United States Congress is prepared to reject science," Sanders told the Guardian. "I think it is important for Republicans to tell their constituents, to tell the American people, and to tell the world whether they agree with the science or not."
That could make for some very awkward moments.
Sanders's amendment has no chance of passage in the Republican-controlled Congress - and he acknowledges that is not the point.
Indeed, when Sanders first introduced the measure in the Senate energy committee last week, one of his fellow Democrats, Joe Manchin of West Virginia, objected to the final clause urging the US to get off fossil fuels and move towards a clean energy economy.
But the amendment promises to produce some embarrassing footage from the Senate floor as Republicans try to align the party leadership's position on climate change with the scientific community - and indeed much of the world outside the United States.
The Republican leadership for several years now has marched in lockstep on climate change, denying its existence and opposing measures to deal with the greenhouse gas emissions that are causing it as part of their strategy against Barack Obama.
Of Republicans in the Senate, 70% deny the existence of climate change or obstruct action on climate change, according to Climate Progress.
Some, such as Jim Inhofe, the chair of the Senate environment and public works committee who calls global warming a hoax, have practised climate denial for years.
Others have shifted positions as the Republican party drifted to the right - and Sanders suggested their newfound denial was a result of political expediency.
"I think some of them - Jim Inhofe, who I like and is a friend of mine, is very sincere in his belief that climate change is a hoax, who absolutely believes that," Sanders said.
"But I think there are other senators who do not believe that. There are other senators who have scientific backgrounds but for political reasons are not prepared to come out and say that climate change is real."
One such senator could be Mark Kirk, an Illinois Republican facing re-election next year. Earlier this month, Kirk appeared to have effected a conversion to climate denial, dismissing global warming as "political correctness". Kirk later hedged on that position.
Such non-denial denials are widespread, Sanders went on. "I think many moderate Republicans, including many business people, know how serious this problem is and want to do something about it," he said.
But there are powerful forces promoting climate denial, Sanders said.
"On the other hand, we have the Koch brothers and energy companies pouring millions into the coffers of the Republican party."
Republicans blocked a similar climate vote last July - after objections from Inhofe.
But the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, seems inclined to allow a vote this time around. The Keystone bill, while guaranteed passage, is unlikely to gather enough support to circumvent a threatened presidential veto.
McConnell has an interest in extending the debate on Keystone, if only to pick off more Democrats to vote in favour of the bill.
Other Democrats would also like to tack riders on the Keystone bill, though none dealing directly with climate change.
McConnell told reporters on Tuesday afternoon that all of the proposed amendments could go ahead. "We are not anxious to block anybody's amendment. We are wide open," he said.
That could make for some interesting moments. Flat-out climate denial - though still acceptable in the Republican party leadership - is not shared by all rank-and-file Republicans.
                     New research this week from the Yale Project on Climate Communications found majorities of moderate and liberal Republican voters do accept the existence of climate change and do want to fight climate change.
Climate denial is also becoming a potential political liability, a signifier that Republicans are old and out of touch with reality. Climate denial has come under sustained attack from environmental campaigners and the green billionaire Tom Steyer, who poured millions into the midterm elections.
A number of prominent Republicans in tight races with Democrats shied away from outright denial, adopting a new formulation: "I'm not a scientist." Even Mitch McConnell, in his race for his Kentucky Senate seat, took up the "I'm not a scientist" wording.
Sanders refused to speculate on how senators might vote when put on the spot on climate change. But it's fair to say that he will enjoy the spectacle.
· This article was amended on 15 January 2015 to clarify that the Yale research found that majorities of moderate and liberal Republican voters accept the existence of climate change, rather than a majority of all Republican voters. An earlier version referred to "majorities of Republican voters".

Load-Date: January 15, 2015


End of Document




Most people are not alarmist or in denial about climate change; The focus courting or battling with the tiny minority of individuals who self-identify as a climate change sceptic is a distraction to the majority of people
The Guardian
March 6, 2015 Friday 11:07 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 947 words
Byline: Adam Corner
Body


No-one likes to be pigeon-holed, but labelling and counter-labelling is an inevitable part of any contentious discussion. From the 'pro-lifers' in arguments about abortion (implying that supporting abortion is 'anti-life'), to the 'Dignity in Dying' campaign (suggesting that their opponents are in favour of an undignified death), categories and classifications define the debates - and often act to denigrate opposing views.
But climate change has been dogged by obsessive (and often vitriolic) name-calling. Whether its 'denier', 'sceptic', 'lukewarmer' or 'alarmist', no-one seems entirely happy with the box they find themselves put in. And new research published recently by Candice Howarth and Amelia Sharman argues that these rigid and often binary labels are producing an unhelpfully antagonistic and combative discourse on climate change. 
 Related: UK flood victims less likely to be climate sceptics
In a paper reviewing and analysing the wide variety of labels applied to people holding different opinions on climate change, Howarth & Sharman begin by emphasising that for an issue like climate change - which is emotionally charged and politically complex - being able to categorise people based on their attitudes makes a lot of sense. But they also argue that many popular labels are accentuating divisions rather than promoting open dialogue. 
Are you a denier?
The term 'denier' has proven particularly controversial: by invoking both negative stereotypes about psychological health and the spectre of anti-Semitism, the term is doubly problematic. Yet the alternative 'sceptic' is no less troublesome. All scientists are 'sceptics', in that they will only accept a hypothesis when there is reliable and consistent evidence for it, and other alternatives have been rejected. But scepticism has come to describe the views of those who dispute mainstream science - an ongoing bone of contention for the scientific community. 
Howarth & Sharman suggest that the very act of creating and applying labels can cause opinions to become increasingly static, and may further emphasize a sense of 'in-group cohesion', exacerbating the lack of a constructive dialogue. But perhaps most importantly, binary (and often derogatory) labels simply do not capture the breadth of public opinion, which for the most part is neither 'alarmed' nor 'in denial' about climate change. 
How to lead on climate change
Our experience at COIN supports the paper's arguments: sustained and meaningful public engagement with climate change and climate solutions is only likely to be unlocked by seeking a multitude of understandings and perspectives on the issue. Another recent paper (in the journal Nature Climate Change ) argued that public acceptance of the scientific consensus on climate change depends on first strengthening the social consensus around policies for reducing carbon emissions (rather than the other way around). Polarising and antagonistic labels are unlikely to be helpful in achieving this. 
 Related: Have the Church of England's ethics got stuck on fossil fuels?
Whatever label you choose to apply, uncertainty about climate change, at root, is driven by people's values and political beliefs, which become entangled with judgments about climate science. People work backwards from policies they don't like the sound of, and downgrade their assessment of the validity of the science. Overcoming this impasse means 'opening up' the debate to dozens of competing perspectives, rather than 'closing it down' through enforced labels and linguistic categories. 
The difficulty, of course, is that there are real, statistically robust relationships between people's political and social beliefs and their views about climate change - and these can be hard to discuss in a 'neutral' way. Conservatives really are more likely to doubt the seriousness of climate change - and this means politics is part of the way that science folds into society, whether we like it or not. But do conservatives have a problem with climate change, or have climate change campaigners failed to communicate in a way that makes sense to the centre-right? 
Achieving a consensus
Some will no doubt argue that people acquire the labels they deserve - and that 'flat-earther', climate denying, conspiracy theorists have no interest in productive dialogue with screeching, doom-mongering 'eco-loons'. A climate change bun fight is certainly an entertaining way to kill a spare few minutes on social media. But for the vast majority of people who don't fall easily into any obvious climate-category, the focus on baiting, courting or battling with the tiny minority of individuals who self-identify as a climate change sceptic is a distraction. 
The real challenge is in creating a chorus of voices that may have very different perspectives, but are nonetheless focused on the common goal of a safe, secure climate for everyone. Nurturing a broad-based social consensus is more important than scoring points in a name-calling debate. 
Maybe we need a new label for this kind of approach...any suggestions? 
                     The                                            leadership hub                                          is funded by Xyntéo. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 'brought to you by'. Find out more                                            here                                          .                   
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a                                            GSB member                                          to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.                   

Load-Date: March 6, 2015


End of Document




Climate change partly to blame for early bushfire season; New analysis confirms the relationship between climate drivers such as El Niño, climate change and the Australian bushfire season
The Guardian(London)
October 11, 2019 Friday 2:10 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:2
Length: 1020 words
Byline: Chris Lucas and Sarah Harris for The Conversation
Body


Summer might be more than six weeks away but out-of-control bushfires have already torn across parts of eastern Australia in recent days, killing two people, destroying homes and threatening more lives.
By Wednesday afternoon up to 30 homes were feared lost or badly damaged by bushfires burning in northern New South Wales. About 40 fires burned across the state.
This did not surprise meteorologists and fire agencies. Record-breaking heat and windy conditions were forecast for parts of NSW and Queensland this week, prompting severe fire danger ratings.
We're often told the Australian bushfire season is starting earlier. This year it began in September on the eastern seaboard. Last year and in 2013 significant spring fires hit NSW and in 2015 they affected much of the nation's southeast.
But what lies behind this phenomenon? We examined seasonal fire weather history for 44 years at 39 weather stations to find the           answer.
This analysis is the most comprehensive ever conducted in Australia. It confirms the strength of the relationship between climate drivers such as El Niño, climate change and the Australian bushfire season. It also demonstrates that a few milder bushfire seasons do not mean climate change isn't happening.
                   Hot, dry, windy conditions spell fire trouble                   
The prerequisites for a severe bushfire season are high temperatures, low humidity, and strong winds that coincide with long periods of low rainfall.
These weather ingredients are used to calculate an area's fire danger rating, using the forest fire danger index. The index produces a score reflecting the severity of fire weather on a given day, where zero represents minimal anger, 50 represents conditions where a fire ban may be issued, and 100 is potentially catastrophic.
Loss of human lives and            property most often occurs on days when the index is high in a particular area. But strong seasonal fire weather doesn't always translate to high-impact fires. Other factors include terrain, vegetation, ignition and the weather on the day.
We analysed the strength of the worst fire weather conditions to understand the relative severity of fire weather during different seasons and years, in relation to various climate drivers.
                   Why is fire weather so different every year?                   
In Australia the year-to-year changes in climate conditions are largely driven by three factors: the El Niño southern oscillation, the            Indian ocean dipole, and the            southern annular mode.
Each of these involves either changes to sea surface temperatures, wind movements, or both. They can all can affect temperature and rainfall patterns across the southern hemisphere, including Australia.
Our research confirmed that across the continent over more than four decades, climate drivers have affected Australia's variable fire weather.
Of these drivers, the El Niño southern oscillation is the most influential. Weather during an El Niño phase is typically hot and dry, leading to worse seasonal bushfire conditions.
The positive phase of the Indian ocean dipole often coincides with El Niño and exacerbates its effects. This phase generally results in lower than average rainfall across southern Australia.
But when these two climate modes are in a negative phase, our research confirms that Australia often experiences more rain and milder bushfire conditions.
The modes evolve over many months and their effects on fire weather persist for several seasons. Their state during winter and spring is a strong indicator for the rest of the fire season for much of Australia.
The southern annular mode refers to the north-south movement of strong westerly winds in parts of the southern hemisphere. When the mode is in a prolonged negative phase, fire weather conditions in Australia are worse, particularly in NSW. This effect is pronounced in winter and spring and means less rainfall and strong westerly winds.
The 2019 winter saw a persistent negative southern annular mode, as did the 2013 and 2018 winter and spring seasons. There was a strong El Niño event and positive Indian ocean dipole in 2015. Australia's bushfire season started earlier than usual in each of those years.
The converse is also true. In 2011 a strong La Niña (the opposite of an El Niño) resulted in milder bushfire seasons, as did the negative Indian ocean dipole of 2016.
                   Climate change is a culprit too                   
Long-term climate change in Australia is an undeniable reality. The State of the Climate 2018 report for Australia notes strong land surface temperature increases and a 10%-20% decline in cool season rainfall across southern Australia since the 1970s. These changes are closely associated with increasing human greenhouse gas emissions, as well as natural variability.
The changed conditions have led to an average increase in severe seasonal bushfire weather across Australia, especially in southern parts of the continent. The increased severity affects all seasons but in particular spring, which means that, on average, the bushfire season is starting earlier.
                   Pulling it all together                   
Our research has made clear that climate modes bring large and rapid swings to the fire weather, while human-induced climate change gradually increases background fire weather conditions. The trend generally means an earlier start to the bushfire seasons than in the past.
Climate change is definitely playing a role in producing the earlier start to bushfire seasons and overall more extreme seasons, particularly in southeastern Australia. However, the natural variations in climate modes continue to play a key role, meaning we should not expect every bushfire season to be worse than the last as a result of climate change.
Similarly, a few milder bushfire seasons among a string of record high seasons do not mean that climate change should be dismissed.
    • Chris Lucas is a senior research scientist at the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and Sarah Harris is manager research and development at the Country Fire Authority

Load-Date: October 11, 2019


End of Document




Former Australian fire chiefs say Coalition ignored their advice because of climate change politics; Former heads of state fire services say government 'fundamentally doesn't like talking about climate change'
The Guardian(London)
November 14, 2019 Thursday 3:21 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:2
Length: 795 words
Byline: Naaman Zhou
Body


A coalition of former fire chiefs have said the government "fundamentally doesn't like talking about climate change" and that politics is the reason the government was ignoring their advice. 
Former heads of the New South Wales, Queensland, Victorian and Tasmanian fire services met in Sydney on Thursday after fires that killed four people tore through the the Australian east coast this week.
They said the climate crisis was making bushfires deadlier and bushfire season longer, and the federal government needed to act immediately.
"Just a 1C temperature rise has meant the extremes are far more extreme, and it is placing lives at risk, including firefighters," said Greg Mullins, the former chief of NSW Fire and Rescue. "Climate change has supercharged the bushfire problem."
"Bushfires are a symptom of climate change," said Neil Bibby, the former chief executive of Victoria's Country Fire Authority.
"Firefighters are the immune system that gets rid of that symptom. But [the problem is] still there."
Mullins said he and 23 other fire and emergency chiefs had been trying to have a meeting with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, since April because they "knew that a bushfire crisis was coming".
Instead, he said current fire chiefs had been locked out of discussions and were "not allowed" to mention climate change.
"This government fundamentally doesn't like talking about climate change," Mullins said. "We would like the doors to be open to the current chiefs, and allow them to utter the words 'climate change'. They are not allowed to at the moment.
"The Grenfell fire in London, people talked about the cause from day one. Train crashes they talk from day one. And it is OK to say it is an arsonist's fault, or pretend that the greenies are stopping hazard reduction burning, which is simply not true.
"But you are not allowed to talk about climate change. Well, we are, because we know what is happening."
Bibby, who was in charge during Victoria's Black Saturday, said politics was the reason the government was ignoring the former fire chiefs' advice.
Other interstate fire chiefs were outspoken about the effect global heating has on bushfires.
Lee Johnson, the former commissioner of Queensland Fire and Emergency Services wanted immediate action.
"I'm here for my children and grandchildren," he said. "In Queensland in the last couple of weeks we have seen unprecedented fires." 
Bob Conroy, former fire manager of NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service, said: "The fires are impacting on areas that haven't known fires for millennia."
Mullins said the bushfire emergency was underlaid by a climate emergency.
"On the 6th of September, southeast Queensland and NSW experienced record fire weather, never before experienced in September. On the 8th of November, again we had record-breaking fire weather in NSW.
"And on the 12th of November, for the first time ever, Sydney experienced catastrophic fire danger. Fires are literally off the scale on this warming planet."
The link between climate change and bushfire risk became a political flashpoint this week.
On Monday the Nationals leader and deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, said it galled him when "inner-city lefties" raised climate change in relation to bushfires.
"We've had fires in Australia since time began, and what people need now is a little bit of sympathy, understanding and real assistance - they need help, they need shelter," he told ABC Radio.
"They don't need the ravings of some pure, enlightened and woke capital city greenies at this time, when they're trying to save their homes, when in fact they're going out in many cases saving other peoples' homes and leaving their own homes at risk."
The NSW Nationals leader, John Barilaro, said it was "a disgrace" for anyone to talk about climate change during the bushfires.
But on Wednesday the Liberal MP and NSW environment minister, Matt Kean, said climate change "is a real issue" and "requires a decisive response". He said science was clear that "our changing climate is seeing more extreme weather events".
In an escalating political debate, Greens senator Jordon Steele-John branded major party politicians "arsonists" for supporting the coal industry.
"You are no better than a bunch of arsonists - borderline arsonists - and you should be ashamed," he told the Senate.
The former fire chiefs had two requests for the government: more resources for firefighters; take on "the fundamental problem" of climate change.
Mullins said he was told the energy minister, Angus Taylor, would speak to him and the water minister, David Littleproud, has set a meeting.
"None of us can understand why climate change in Australia is so political," he said. "In the UK, the conservatives, Margaret Thatcher, said years ago this is a major problem."

Load-Date: November 14, 2019


End of Document




New Zealanders rank climate change above Covid this election
The Guardian (London)
September 18, 2020 Friday 9:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:4
Length: 916 words
Byline: Eleanor Ainge Roy in Queenstown
Highlight: Guardian readers place concern about the environment far above the coronavirus pandemic, which has dominated headlines in 2020


Body


One month out from New Zealand's general election and the major parties are on the campaign trail, donning high-vis jackets and face masks to visit factories, small businesses and schools around the country.
We asked Guardian readers what issues they would be voting on come 17 October, and perhaps surprisingly, for many, the pandemic took a back seat.
In 90% of the responses, one topic reigned supreme: Dorothy, 71, from Auckland summed it up, in her two-word response to our callout, which garnered hundreds of replies: "Climate change."
In addition to an overwhelming interest in the climate crisis, many also cited persistent wealth inequality, poverty, the environment and a lack of housing affordability as the issues they care about.
With New Zealand officially entering a recession this week, it few said they'd vote on economic policies or jobs. For many, 2020 seems to have crystallised their major priorities, summed up by a Maori proverb that is also a favourite of the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern.
Q He aha te mea nui o te ao? (What is the most important thing in the world?)
                     A He Tangata, He Tangata, He Tangata. ( The people, people, the people.)
                   What's your main election issue? Climate change                   
"Climate change, climate change, climate change..."Peter, 60, Blenheim
"Climate change policy - we've run out of time for meaningful, structural, societal change. If we don't act now to reduce emissions any way we can, the environmental and financial costs will be higher by several orders of magnitude. If we don't do something, everything, now we are all screwed in a monumentally unfixable way."Anonymous, 50, Wellington
"It feels like with the pandemic, the issue of the environment, yet again, has been shunted to the side. I will be voting for the first time this year, and it will be for whoever provides the most complete and ambitious environmental plan for our country."Joshua, 19, Auckland
"Climate action, welfare reform & wealth inequality."Simon, 29, Mt Victoria
"[This is] an opportunity for New Zealand to take a fresh look at the future direction of our economy in terms of sustainability, climate change and the health and happiness of ALL our people. Time to rethink whether 'economic growth is good',"Clint, 71, Auckland
"Simply put, the climate crisis is the only thing on my mind. Before the pandemic, pundits were calling this the 'climate election', and it should still be considered so." Henry, 22
"Climate change, Climate change, Climate change. "Melanie, 52, Auckland
                   Covid-19                   
"This election is entirely about our response to the global pandemic. We've been lucky here to have a very fortunate location, but that would have been nullified if we'd not also had a very competent government. So for me, it will be about stability and consistency."Danny Walker, 43, Lower Hutt
"Getting and keeping Covid-19 under control. Nothing positive can happen until Covid is out of the way."Philip, 65, Auckland
"Obviously, who do I trust to manage the Covid-19 response?"Stefan, Northland, 40
"Covid-19. Everything else is secondary. We need to ensure Jacinda Ardern stays our prime minister."John, 56, Auckland
"This pandemic has shown the importance of science. I will be voting for people and parties who embrace science to underlie their policies." Anonymous
                   Poverty, inequality, social infrastructure                   
"My experience in working in emergency housing has convinced me of two things, climate change aside: poverty and inequality are the greatest issues facing NZ, and that the solution to this lies in Maori hands, not Pakeha."Duncan, 56, Auckland
"I'm concerned that poverty, which was a major issue in the previous election, is not getting the attention it deserves this year. In these difficult times, we should not forget about those who are least well-off."Anonymous
"Family, equality, poverty"Ali, 56, Nelson
"We're chucking all of this money at the [Covid] rebuild, but are we actually going to build something worth having? Or will it just be more stuff ? Is there social infrastructure we can be investing in? What can we do to build resilience, not just wealth? Also ... what the heck is up with Auckland's public transport?"Alastair, 30, Papakura
"Leadership that acknowledges that neoliberal economics is damaging the world."Ruth, 71, Bay of Plenty
"A fair kind society, where health, housing, education and child poverty are taken seriously. A Government which puts people first, especially now during Covid, because no economy will succeed if the health of the nation isn't the first priority."Sherlee, 79, Canterbury
                   Referendums                   
"For me, in the 2020 election, the referendums are much more high priority than the general election. I believe it is better to take control away from gangs and a blackmarket from cannabis and give control over to hospitals and people. As for euthanasia, it is something I am very passionate about because I believe strongly in the right to live and to die with dignity. For both these issues, I will be definitely voting yes."Anonymous
"Against euthanasia bill. Against cannabis. Against handouts, Against raising unemployment benefit - against anything incentivising dependence on social benefits."Anonymous
                     Responses have been edited for clarity and brevity                   
    • This article was amended on 20 September 2020 to remove some personal information.

Load-Date: September 21, 2020


End of Document




Coalition's axing of funding to climate change adaptation body condemned; National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility funding was discontinued in 2017, while Scott Morrison was treasurer
The Guardian(London)
January 15, 2020 Wednesday 4:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:3
Length: 894 words
Byline: Paul Karp
Body


The Coalition's decision to axe funding to a climate change adaptation research body in 2017 has left Australia "not well positioned" to deal with fires, the "silent killer" of drought and other global heating impacts, its director has said.
Jean Palutikof, the director of the National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility (NCCARF), told Guardian Australia the decision to discontinue funding in 2017 - when Scott Morrison was treasurer - had hollowed out the research community and "the capacity to take action on climate change is smaller than it was decade ago".
Palutikof made the comments as Scott Morrison and the science minister, Karen Andrews, attempt to shift debate from the link between climate change and bushfires to strategies for "adaptation and resilience".
The research facility at Griffith University was a Howard government initiative, funded in the 2008 budget by the Rudd government and continued under the Abbott government with $9m over three years in the 2014 budget.
According to the environment department, the body has produced 144 adaptation research projects since 2008 with a total of $56.3m in federal funding.
But in 2017, the Coalition gave the body just $600,000 to continue its existing online platforms that inform decision makers seeking to adapt to changes in climate, with no ongoing federal funding from 2018.
Palutikof said the funding cut had forced it to axe conferences for researchers and community workshops informing business, local government and citizens about their exposure to climate risk.
Palutikof warned that - although bushfire cooperative research centres have continued to receive funding - bushfire is "not the only risk", citing drought and other natural disasters such as floods.
"I worry if it starts to rain and bushfires cease to be an immediate risk some money will be pumped in and then we'll forget about it," she said. "The government will call it adaptation and resilience but people will be left in the same vulnerable state they were when these bushfires hit."
A spokesman for environment minister Sussan Ley responded that the government is "investing heavily in climate adaptation and mitigation" and claimed investment is growing.
He cited a $23.9m commitment to the national environment sciences and climate change hub in science agency CSIRO, $37m for climate science monitoring and forecasting in CSIRO and $30m for the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence and Climate Extremes.
Ebony Bennett, the Australia Institute deputy director, said the decision to cut the NCCARF's adaptation funding was "shortsighted" and "typical of the Coalition approach to climate policy".
"Any economist will tell you an ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure," she said. "The government's new embrace of adaptation and resilience is welcome, but it's the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff approach.
"To reduce the amount of gas and coal mined and burned in Australia is the [better] response ... to prevent hotter and drier summers in future."
Labor's climate spokesman, Mark Butler, said: "The Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison governments have cut funding for significant adaptation work at [science agency] CSIRO, completely de-funded the NCCARF and produced a national disaster risk reduction framework that failed to take climate change seriously.
"The 2017 review of climate change policies completely excluded climate adaptation."
Labor's criticism comes as the government held roundtables in Canberra to discuss the response to the bushfire crisis at which Ley met wildlife experts and Andrews met scientific organisations.
Suzanne Milthorpe, national environment laws campaigner at the Wilderness Society, said the wildlife roundtable had seen "strong recognition that we can't go back to business as usual".
"Australia was already the extinction nation, the bushfire crisis has exacerbated that severely," she said. "We need not just to return to pre-bushfire levels but to aim for health and resilience and against further shock.
"This is an unprecedented catastrophe - the first at this scale - but it won't be the last."
Andrews said the science roundtable would discuss evidence about patterns of bushfire behaviour, contributors to the current fire season and tools to predict future seasons.
Butler said the meeting was "a start" but Labor "won't hold our breath waiting for real action on climate adaptation or action".
Earlier, Andrews told Nine Newspapers that "every second we spend discussing if climate change is real is a second we don't spend addressing these issues".
Andrews issued a rebuke to many government MPs who continue to dispute the contribution of climate change to bushfires, such as George Christensen and Craig Kelly, warning it is time to "move on and get over this".
At a press conference in Canberra announcing extra bushfire payments to families, Morrison said the hazards of "longer, hotter, drier summers" had "always been acknowledged by the government".
Morrison said that adaptation measures including hazard reduction, building dams and learning from Indigenous burning practices are "a part of that important response".
"Our policy is to reduce emissions, to build resilience and to focus on adaptation," he said. "All of these are the necessary responses to what's happening with our climate. They are not either or, they are not one instead of the other."

Load-Date: January 16, 2020


End of Document




Brexit is not a vote against climate change says UN's climate chief; Christiana Figueres says the UK can still be a leader on climate change and emphasises the need for the country to 'stay calm and transform on'
The Guardian
June 28, 2016 Tuesday 7:21 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 609 words
Byline: Laura Paddison
Body


Britain's decision to leave the European Union was not a vote against climate change, nor was it a vote against the innovation key to fighting climate change, UN climate chief Christiana Figueres told an audience of business and policymakers at the annual Business & Climate summit in London today.
 Related:  EU out vote puts UK commitment to Paris climate agreement in doubt
In her last speech as the head of UN's climate change body the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Figueres said, "It's absolutely clear that should article 50 be triggered, the UK would have to reconfigure trading relations with the EU ... there's going to be quite a bit of volatility and uncertainty for at least about two years." But, she added, "there's no reason to upset the apple cart on this," she urged the UK to "stay calm and transform on."
The second annual Business & Climate Change summit, convened by The Climate Group, focuses on businesses' role in implementing the targets set out in the Paris climate agreement, the first legally binding commitment to curb carbon emissions to keep global temperature rises below 2C.
While organisers expressed concern that Britain's political instability will distract from broader questions about climate action, Figueres told attendees that climate change action was now unstoppable and much bigger than the shorter term political instability we currently face. "The UK has a very important leadership on climate change and there is no reason to change that," she said. 
These were sentiments echoed by Paul Simpson, CEO of environmental data non-profit CDP. "Of course it's a time of uncertainty but there is cross-party consensus on climate change in the UK that will continue to exist."
 Related:  How can we make Brexit work for the environment? | Craig Bennett
Simpson was at the conference to launch a new report, produced by CDP in partnership with climate coalition We Mean Business, which puts figures on the amount of carbon emissions businesses could save if they act on climate change. 
Based on businesses signing up to five global climate change initiatives, including science-based targets and zero deforestation goals, the report claims that by 2030 companies could cut 3.7bn tonnes of CO2. This is equivalent to the emissions of today's EU and more than 60% of the total emissions cuts pledged by countries at Paris. 
If every relevant business signed up to these initiatives emissions savings could be as high as 10bn tonnes, says the report, equivalent to those of China, the world's largest emitter. 
Government action will be key to business hitting these figures, said Steve Howard chief sustainability officer for Ikea and We Mean Business board member. "To go further and faster, we need a policy framework", he said. These would include policies which favour a low-carbon economy, carbon pricing, incentives for companies to build their own renewables facilities and financial incentives around energy efficiency.
 The report identifies transport and the heating and cooling of buildings as areas where more climate action is needed. It also calls for inclusion of more companies from the global south, currently underrepresented in the initiatives considered.
Simpson said the report, which will be updated annually, is a work in progress and will be expanded in the future to cover further business initiatives.
 During an earlier press conference, Figueres, who steps down from the IPCCC in July, did not deny rumours that she is gearing up for a bid to become the next UN secretary general to replace Ban Ki-moon. She maintained she was keeping her "full focus" on her current role until her term ends.

Load-Date: June 28, 2016


End of Document




PBS is the only network reporting on climate change. Trump wants to cut it; During a record-breaking hot presidential election year, American news networks failed to report on climate change
The Guardian(London)
March 27, 2017 Monday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 800 words
Byline: Dana Nuccitelli
Body


Media Matters for America has published its annual review of American evening newscast climate coverage for 2016, and the results are stunning:
                       In 2016, evening newscasts and Sunday shows on ABC, CBS, and NBC, as well as Fox Broadcast Co.'s Fox News Sunday, collectively decreased their total coverage of climate change by 66 percent compared to 2015                     
In all of 2016, these news programs spent a combined grand total of 50 minutes talking about climate change. More than half of that come from CBS Evening News, which nevertheless only spent half as much time talking about climate change in 2016 as it had in 2015.
It's certainly not as though 2016 lacked newsworthy climate stories. We learned in January that 2015 had smashed the record for hottest year, previously set just a year earlier. And 2016 just kept getting hotter, with nearly every month setting a new heat record. In September, the US and China agreed to formally ratify the Paris climate agreement. The list goes on and on, with newspapers like The Guardian constantly publishing important climate-related news throughout the year.
During 2016 there was also an ongoing presidential campaign in which the candidates' views on climate science and policy should have been featured prominently. Unfortunately, climate change was rarely raised in the primary debates, and never in the general election debates. In fact, on Sunday news programs, Bernie Sanders brought up climate change four times more often than the program hosts.
Only after the election did news networks finally examine what a President Trump would mean for the Earth's climate:
                       ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox News Sunday did not air a single segment informing viewers of what to expect on climate change and climate-related policies or issues under a Trump or Clinton administration. While these outlets did devote a significant amount of coverage to Trump's presidency, airing 25 segments informing viewers about the ramifications or actions of a Trump administration as they relate to climate change, all of these segments aired after the election.                     
As Senator Brian Schatz (D-HI) noted, this was a dismal failure by the American news networks:
                       In a year when the American people were deciding who our next leader should be, you would think there would have been more discussions about climate change in our news programs, not less. This isn't just shameful, it's irresponsible. The climate is changing, and it's affecting everything from the weather to our national security and our economy. Its impacts are already being felt and the American people deserve to know more about it.                     
PBS was the oasis in this desert of climate news coverage. PBS NewsHour was the only show that examined what impact a Trump or a Clinton presidency would have on climate-related issues and policies before the election. The PBS news program aired more than double the number of climate news segments as any of its network competitors, and interviewed or quoted three times more scientists than even CBS Evening News. ABC World News Tonight failed to interview or quote a single scientist about climate change.
Perhaps unsurprisingly given his climate denial, Trump's proposed budget would completely defund the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which partially funds PBS. About half of that federal funding goes to local PBS stations that broadcast PBS NewsHour. Some of those stations - especially those in rural areas which rely particularly heavily on federal funding - would likely have to shut down, were Trump to get his budgetary wish.
With so little news coverage on the subject, it's also unsurprising how confused Americans are about climate change - just 49% of Americans realize that most scientists think global warming is happening, and only 53% understand that humans are causing the problem. While concern among Americans about global warming is at an eight-year high, only 64% worry a great deal or fair amount. 
That's entirely understandable - if our leaders deny the problem, and our news networks don't report on it, Americans are lacking the information signaling that global warming is an urgent threat. That's why, although Americans ( including Trump voters ) would prefer that their political leaders take steps to address the problem, they don't few it as a high priority, and thus aren't bothered by the lack of political action.
When future generations look back in disbelief at our failure to take the needed steps to preserve a stable climate, the history books will take a harsh view of today's media outlets and political leaders who refused to inform the public or protect its health and welfare in the face of such an immense known threat. 

Load-Date: March 27, 2017


End of Document




Coalition MP to climate strike students: 'Everything you are told is a lie' - as it happened; Craig Kelly declares 'there is no link between climate change and drought' as Labor grills government over $4.6bn underspend on NDIS. This blog has now closedEric Abetz compares The Conversation to NazisBudget effectively in balance after $4.6bn NDIS underspendMy dear prime minister: Alan Jones's letter of apology to Jacinda Ardern revealed
The Guardian(London)
September 18, 2019 Wednesday 11:01 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:19
Length: 22249 words
Byline: Amy Remeikis
Body


block-time published-time 6.55am BST 
And on that note, and mostly because I have reached my capacity to deal with this today, we are going to call it a night and put the blog to sleep until October, when parliament resumes.
That sound you hear is the anticipation of the rush to the airport, because everyone is quite done with today.
Parliament will resume on 14 October for the third-last joint sitting week for the year. There are separate House and Senate sitting weeks, but just three joint sitting weeks left.
Huzzah.
Make sure you check back at the Guardian - I'll be back on regular political news duties, Katharine Murphy is travelling with the prime minister and will have the US trip news and Paul Karp  and Sarah Martin  will have everything else and more.
A massive thank you to Mike Bowers, who is somehow still standing, and to everyone else at the Guardian's braintrust for keeping it all going.
And most of all, a massive thank you to you for joining us this sitting. We will be back in just under a month, but please, in the meantime - take care of you. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.00am BST
block-time published-time 6.49am BST 
How Mike Bowers saw question time:
    You just KNOW he's waited his whole life for this moment. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Yup. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Sames tho. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Mood of the nation. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Another meeting which could have been an email. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      When the main show is in the sidelines. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.51am BST
block-time published-time 6.40am BST 
 Zali Steggall will be joining the climate strike in Sydney, with her office:
The Not Business as Usual campaign has attracted thousands of businesses pledging to close their doors to send a message that governments must take urgent against climate change.
Strikes are planned in 120 countries, including more than 140 protest locations across Australia, three days before the UN Climate Action summit in New York.
Zali and her team will be catching the Manly ferry to the protest that begins at 12pm at the Domain in Sydney's CBD.
"Global warming is an issue that impacts us all. We all have a responsibility to call for more preventative action by the government," Ms Steggall said.
"We are on track to burden the next generation with its greatest intergenerational debt ever and I do not find that acceptable."
"I encourage as many people to join me on the strike to send a strong message to the government that we will not sit idly by as the detrimental effects of climate change such as terrible health impacts are being felt."
The local Warringah office will remain open for constituents with urgent issues.
block-time published-time 6.14am BST 
 Michael McCormack calls time on question time for the "Morrison-McCormack government" and I call time on my ability to stomach any more of this, so everyone is a winner. 
block-time published-time 6.12am BST 
 Lisa Chesters  to  Michael McCormack: 
Can the acting prime minister confirm that the government has managed the delivery of the inland rail project so badly that it has alienated key support groups, including the New South Wales farmers Association, Agfa force, the Victorian Farmers Federation, Country Women's Association and the National Farmers Federation?
McCormack:
I just wish the member for Bendigo was perhaps a little more positive around the inland rail. This is going to be a transformational, nation building, 1,700km corridor of commerce. Is going to, for the first time, product from paddock to port within 24 hours. This is absolutely critical for rural and regional Australia. 
All the other in rural and regional members of the Labor side, of whom that not many, should get on board. Every single member of the parliament should get on board. I know those on our side are in favour of inland rail which reduces rail freight costs by up to $94 per tonne. It was and it certainly predicated on a saving of $10 per tonne. The CSIRO report indicated there was potential savings of $94 savings. An average saving of $76 per tonne saving as opposed to $10 per tonne on the original case although I can say that in parts of my electorate where parts of the rail are rapidly under way, how many jobs that is created in just that particular area. Yes, I understand that there are concerns. I appreciate there are people further permit the inland rail will have an impact. 
He is still talking but I have had way too much Michael McCormack for one day and possibly a lifetime, so check the Hansard if you are that desperate. Or maybe stare at a wall. Same thing, really. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.44am BST
block-time published-time 6.08am BST 
Nope wait,  Michael McCormack  lures me back with this:
Mr Speaker, they burnt the Murray-Darling Basin plan, the draft of the plan, they were so aggravated with his water resource ideas, they were so absolutely aggrieved with the position he took, and if those opposite had won on May 18, Mr Speaker, they would have been back in May.
Most of the water of the Murray-Darling, what little water there is, would be out of the mouth of the Murray, because that is their policy. When not going to do that, and we won't be deterred by the Victorian water minister, Lisa Neville, who said ruling out dams in the southern state - " new dams do not create any more water, they just take it from somewhere else". I ask if they agree with that, Mr Speaker."
That is the literal truth of a dam. I could dig one in my backyard and water would not fill it, because dams need water to come from somewhere else, be it an underwater well, a river, lake or the fricking sky. Without that water from somewhere else, it is just a giant hole.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.13am BST
block-time published-time 6.03am BST 
Look, Michael McCormack  is still talking, but I just found a piece of puffed rice from an old rice cracker on my desk and I got distracted by its sudden charisma.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.05am BST
block-time published-time 5.59am BST 
 Michael McCormack tells Joel Fitzgibbon he "does not get bullied by anyone" and I just spat out my tea.
block-time published-time 5.57am BST 
 Anthony Albanese  to Michael McCormack: 
My question is to the person currently leading the McCormick government. He wanted me to say that. The acting prime minister, Mr Speaker. What is the government doing to ensure that journalism is not a crime?
 McCormack: 
Mr Speaker, as a former journalist with 21 years as a daily newspaper editor, I of course believe in freedom of press. The press. The government is committed to the freedom of the press. It is central to our democracy. It always has been, is now, always will be. It is also the government 's first duty to keep Australians safe. That is the first priority Mr Speaker. These considerations need to be carefully balanced. The government has asked the parliamentary joint media on intelligence and security to inquire into the impact of the exercise of law enforcement and intelligence powers on the freedom of the press.
As the attorney general has just said, we thought that was bipartisan. At the committee's request and as agreed by the attorney general, the reporting date for this inquiry has been extended to 20th November. 
The search warrants executed by the Australian federal police to investigate under old laws that a Liberal National government repealed and replaced them with provisions for strong protections for journalists about this matter is now before the court, will not be appropriate to comment further. 
Operational decisions are a matter, as they have to be, for the AFP and remain independent of executive government. It is a way it should be.
"Well done", says one of the ministers behind him, because at this stage, apparently getting through a question with words which approximate understandable sentences is cause for a gold star.
Honestly. Flat lemonade has more pith.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.03am BST
block-time published-time 5.51am BST 
 Angus Taylor looks like he is saying something.
Next
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.55am BST
block-time published-time 5.51am BST 
enltrThe government is restrained from removing the family from Australia pending a final hearing.
- Josh Taylor (@joshgnosis) September 19, 2019
block-time published-time 5.50am BST 
Richard Marles to Michael McCormack:
My question is to the acting prime minister. What is the government's position on extending the so-called "big stick" legislation to supermarkets?
(Insert Admiral Ackbar gif)
 Michael McCormack: 
I will get the energy minister to add to my remarks but I'll answer the question from the deputy opposition leader. The big stick legislation is important legislation but it is also very important because what we want to do is make sure that we have the most reliable, affordable, energy for Australians. 
That is what we've always said that is what we have certainly put in place. That why, at last, energy prices are coming down. Under those opposite, I have to say they couldn't even explain how much the energy costs were going to be for average businesses and acting families.
 Tony Burke: 
Does the issue of direct relevance as to whether someone reacts to a trigger word ordeals of the contents of the question. The context of the question is entirely about whether or not that legislation should apply to supermarkets and the deputy prime minister, the acting premise those going nowhere near that issue.
 Christian Porter: 
Mr Speaker, because there is no plan. The acting prime minister is speaking to the only part of the question that he can intelligibly speak to [in regards to] big stick legislation in relation to energy.
 Tony Smith: 
I will rule on the point of order first. The question was very specific. It did not contain a preamble. I was about to say to the deputy prime minister, the acting prime minister, of course he is entitled to a preamble on the issue but my... 
The scope of, obviously of a very specific question, is very limited in this respect and the other thing I was going to say. I thought I heard the acting prime minister say, he would at some point, refer to the energy minister stop there is a difficulty with that because unless he can convince me that the energy minister is responsible for supermarkets, that is the problem. 
We can refer to a minister who has portfolio responsibility for that area and obviously that could be a number of ministers but I think for the acting prime minister, he's been entitled to deal with the energy policy point up until now which he has done. I think that either he needs to go to the specific part of the question or refer it or we can move onto the next question. 
 McCormack: 
We're taking on the energy companies. We make no apology for that.
*insert gif of stormtrooper hitting head*
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.54am BST
block-time published-time 5.41am BST 
And while we are taking moments, let's all take a moment to remember that  Scott Morrison stepped in to save Craig Kelly from being rolled in his preselection, three years after Malcolm Turnbull stepped in and saved him from being rolled in his preselection.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.45am BST
block-time published-time 5.39am BST 
 Jim Chalmers  to  Josh Frydenberg: 
Why won't the treasurer admit that today's budget outcome would not be possible without making Australians with a disability wait for the care that they need and deserve and were promised so that he can add $4.6bn to the budget line?
 Josh Frydenberg: 
The member for Rankin's claim is not true.
That's it. That's the whole answer. Let's all take a moment to thank Frydenberg's voice for doing us a solid and deciding to fail in protest to all the unnecessary yelling. Well done, little dude. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.41am BST
block-time published-time 5.36am BST 
Centre Alliance's Rex Patrick has asked the Senate president Scott Ryan  about reports that China was responsible for the hack of parliament's computer systems in February, which China            dismissed as "baseless".
Ryan replied that it would not be appropriate to comment but restated Scott Morrison 's formulation that a "sophisticated state actor" was responsible. He said a small amount of data was taken but none was deemed sensitive.
Network security is of the "highest priority" and Ryan promises to give a further update at Senate supplementary estimates. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.40am BST
block-time published-time 5.33am BST 
The science minister is now taking a lickspittle on why kids should get into science in the same hour as a member of her party just said climate change wasn't real because it is cold in some places and hot in others.
block-time published-time 5.30am BST 
 Richard Di Natale  has asked Mathias Cormann  about Friday's climate strike and whether he can guarantee public servants won't be penalised for attend. 
Cormann said the Coalition is "committed to effective action on climate change". 
" All of the public servants know what their duties and responsibilities are and I encourage them to conduct appropriately with rules,"  he said. 
Hint, hint: don't skip work.
Cormann said that "what people do in their free time is up to them" but he is not in favour of students going on strike.
"Students should go to school, that will prepare them to be best possible contributors to their communities."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.35am BST
block-time published-time 5.30am BST 
"I know how we'll get through to the yoof! We'll send out the guy who always looks like he is yelling at you from a ute's window, to tell them easily googable information is a LIE! That'll get them. That's radical dude. So awake." 
- The monkeypodders, presumably. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.34am BST
block-time published-time 5.27am BST 
 Coalition MP to climate strike students: 'Everything you are told is a lie'  
No one:
Absolutely no one:
Not a single soul:
 Craig Kelly: 
I understand how persuasive that peer group pressure can be for teenagers and their desire to conform and fit in with the crowd.
However, I would say to any student considering joining the so-called climate protest, don't be a sheep and think for yourself because you are being used and manipulated and everything you are told is a lie.
The facts are, there is no link between climate change and drought. Polar bears are increasing in number. Today's generation is safer from extreme weather at any time in human history. 
There is no 97% consensus. Such claims are a fraud. Crop yields have increased remarkably, wildfires have declined 25% over the past two decades, we are seeing less cyclones, not more. 
Cold weather kills many times more than hot weather, including here in Australia. The sea ice is not melting away. 
In fact, where the ill-fated Franklin expedition sailed in 1845, this year is blocked by thick sea ice. 
Renewables ain't renewable and they certainly don't make electricity cheaper. And if you are worried about sea level rise, I suggest that you get some old photos of Fort Denison, get the tide gauge data and go and have a look for yourself.
 Don't take my word. I encourage all students in my electorate to study the science and learn for themselves.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.31am BST
block-time published-time 5.25am BST 
 Josh Frydenberg's throat appears to be on the side of good and has decided the treasurer has done TOO MUCH YELLING given the coughs and voice cracks in this lickspittle. 
block-time published-time 5.24am BST 
 Sussan Ley made a comment about some people confusing state and federal environmental laws when it came to developments, in response to a question Rebehka Sharkie asked. Sharkie's eyebrows went so high, you might find them somewhere on Kosciuszko.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.26am BST
block-time published-time 5.22am BST 
 Richard Marles  to  Josh Frydenberg: 
Will the treasurer admit that the government's decision to underfund the national disability insurance scheme is preventing Australians with a disability from getting the care they need? Why has the government propped up its budget by deliberately under spending $4.6bn on the national disability insurance scheme?
 Frydenberg: 
I can confirm that there are 11,000 people helping to deliver the NDIS, and in the last year 115,000 Australians came on to the NDIS, Mr Speaker. There are now 300,000 Australians on the NDIS, and as the acting prime minister said, more than 100,000 of them are getting support for the first time. 
The reality is, the NDIS has increased tenfold in the three years of transition, Mr Speaker. Everyone who has been approved in the program is getting support under a fully funded NDIS. Mr Speaker, in 2018/19 we doubled the funding and the spending on the NDIS to $8.5bn from the $4bn a year prior. 
Mr Speaker, the Labor party knows all too well but only the Coalition can deliver budget surpluses. Only the Coalition can fund services like the NDIS, that Australians need and deserve.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.24am BST
block-time published-time 5.18am BST 
 Josh Frydenberg  gets the next lickspittle but I didn't hit the down volume button in time and my eardrums are blown out and now there is blood on my keyboard. 
block-time published-time 5.17am BST 
Now Richard Marles does it:
I refer to the minister's previous answer about demand in the NDIS. If the government seriously suggesting that Australians with a disability aren't out there waiting for care packages? And if the government seriously suggesting that the NDIS can adequately meet demand with a $4.6bn dollar underspend?
 Michael McCormack: 
Funding for the NDIS is guaranteed Mr Speaker. No Australian who is eligible for the NDIS will miss out. No Australian will miss out. 
...We are strongly committed to the NDIS. As I said, as the minister said in the first question and Question Time today, it is want of the most important social and economic reforms in our country 's history. I'm proud to say that when this reform was suggested by Prime Minister Gillard who is in the house today, I saw her this morning and commended her for the work she doing with Beyond Blue and other organisations in her post political career. She has been a class act, I have to say and this was good reform Mr Speaker. I was proud to say that I was the first New South Wales federal parliamentarian to sign up to the everyone counts campaign which happened at the time the NDIS was first mooted. 
The vast majority of the more than 300,000 participants, it is delivering improved levels of support, more choice and control. Over 100,000 people are receiving disability support services for the first time ever. It is good policy reform, Mr Speaker but I have to say, I have to say that when those introduced this legislation, they did not put the amount of money towards the NDIS that was required. We are finding the reform, we are backing the NDIS and again, Mr Speaker, I say funding for the NDIS is guaranteed.
 Terri Butler gets kicked out of question time. Lucky her. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.19am BST
block-time published-time 5.14am BST 
 George Christensen  is the first one to inflict Michael McCormack on us and I'd love to tell you what it was about but I was groaning under the desk too loudly to hear. 
block-time published-time 5.14am BST 
 Question time begins  
OK. Let's do this.
Sigh.
 Jim Chalmers to  Stuart Robert: 
What is the value of the underspend on the NDIS in the final budget outcome?
 Robert :
...As he knows today in the final budget update, the actual number for the NDIS was a spend of$8.5bn. The great thing to remember about the NDIS, if we look at actual cost per participant, in the 18/19 budget, it was estimated and expenditure $46,400 participant. 
The... actual spend was $46,800. Therefore a $400 increase. Not a single person has seen a decrease. The underspend figure of $4.6bn can be explained as follows. 
When the bilateral estimate will put together, they said it would be 3,172 Australians.
The bilateral estimate had 30,200 expected citizens but once the data derived from the states and territories, only want hundred and 99,000 citizens could be found. 
They are not able to be found from the state and territories or not able to be double counted frankly, the data is wrong when hundred thousand. However, on top of that, the bilateral estimate said that 69,195 new participants would come through. In actuality, when hundred and 117,000 new participants have sought access.
 A 109% increase in new participants have come through. How is it that we have been able to find this demand driven scheme and uncapped, demand driven scheme. 
Anywhere we been able to find it, not last year, not this year, but every year going forward. $17.8bn this year growing to $25bn in 22, 23. The only reason we can find going forward is because we, this government, led by this treasurer has actually balanced the budget.
Today's announcement was about balancing the budget. The first time in a long time, 11 years! Precipitated by those opposite, the budget is balanced this year and next year and the following years going forward. This government will not be lectured by those opposite when it comes to fiscal discipline and how we fund services.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am BST
block-time published-time 5.02am BST 
No, wait, Michael McCormack  is sitting in the prime minister's chair and I am back to looking at that off-planet lifestyle. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.03am BST
block-time published-time 5.00am BST 
OK. Julie Owens just did a whole statement in Auslan and maybe parts of the planet are OK.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.07am BST
block-time published-time 4.59am BST 
Oh FFS.
 Craig Kelly obviously saw Malcolm Roberts'  contribution on the dolphin debate and decided his crown was under threat, because he just made a CLIMATE CHANGE ISN'T REAL speech in a 90 second statement and I don't want to live on this planet any more.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.01am BST
block-time published-time 4.40am BST 
I really don't know who let the stupid out today, but this was Malcolm Roberts' contribution to a Greens motion to have dolphins banned from performing in captivity. 
This is an actual thing that an actual senator said in our actual parliament. 
 Malcolm Roberts: 
This is yet another example of the arrogance of the Greens to presume that they know what dolphins are thinking and feeling. We have a horse. Our daughter has a wonderful horse named Clancy. Clancy is a horse, so he behaves in accordance with being a herd animal. People who take a horse out of a herd usually have a companion animal. We chose not to. Clancy is now on our acreage at home. He loves being with humans. He does not like being with horses. The point of the matter is that we don't know what animals think.
Secondly, dolphins like humans. That's a fact. That's well known. Dolphins are attracted to humans. These kinds of practices actually fund research into dolphins, and these kinds of businesses support the curing of dolphins recovering from being hit by boats. This is yet another example of the Greens pretending that they know everything.
If there is extraterrestrial intelligent life out there, we know why they are not making contact. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am BST
block-time published-time 4.33am BST 
It is almost question time. I feel smallpox coming on.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44am BST
block-time published-time 4.33am BST 
 Pat Dodson has released a statement: 
Patrick Dodson, Labor Senator for Western Australia, has expressed concern about the shooting by Western Australian Police of an Aboriginal woman in Geraldton on Tuesday evening.
"I acknowledge that the Police have committed to conducting a thorough inquiry into this tragic death, with oversight apparently by the Corruption and Crime Commission.
"Without wanting to prejudice that inquiry, I can only echo the question being posed by many in the community: why was it necessary to resort to the lethal force of a firearm to resolve whatever trouble the Police were confronting on Tuesday evening?
"I extend my deepest sympathies to the family of the dead woman.
"The Aboriginal community of Geraldton deserve a full account of what happened. Any inquiry, including the Coroner's inquiry, will take a long time to report and community concerns need to be settled as soon as possible.
"In the meantime, I urge the Aboriginal people of Geraldton to stay calm in these difficult times and not to engage in any provocative or retaliatory behaviour."
block-time published-time 4.21am BST 
What is Jim Chalmers' idea of a "responsible surplus"?
There are at least half a dozen things the government should be contemplating. 
Well, they can pick up any of these six ideas we've proposed, and they can cost them and they can be done responsibly and affordably. 
They can bring forward part of their stage two tax cuts. They can fund a responsible increase in Newstart. They can bring some infrastructure spending. They can have a business incentive investment, a wages policy, and energy policy - and in the absence of an energy policy has been a handbrake on growth in the economy for too long.
There are so many things the government should be considering. Instead they give press conferences, patting themselves on the back to shortchanging Australians with a disability, and they pretend everything's hunky-dory in the economy.
Walk down a main street in Australia, either side. Ask the workers and managers how they are going. I think when you get the answers to that and what the government wants to pretend about the economy, you can see why so many people will conclude that the government, when it comes to the economy, is hopelessly out of touch.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.30am BST
block-time published-time 4.16am BST 
 Bill Shorten  had a few choice words about the NDIS underspend in the budget: 
The NDIS is constipated. The money's meant to be there getting out to the people. Mr Morrison struts in parliament and says, listen, it's a demand-driven program and the reason why we've been able to pocket $3.6bn is because the demand isn't there. That's just a lie.
The reality is the demand is there. Go to speak with people in the communities and those watching and reading news today, they will be furious. The reality is, in the last 10 weeks I've travelled across Australia, it's been jaw dropping to realise people are waiting 12 months, two years for a wheelchair, but at the same time the government says no problems here, we will pocket the money. 
The problem is the NDIS hasn't had a CEO for 120 days and Minister Roberts had legislation in the House and he was too busy to back in his own legislation. 
This government is disinterested. The NDIS is adrift. It's doing good things but there's too many people missing out and now we know where the money is. 
 Josh Frydenberg is giving himself a pat on the back with Mathias Cormann. They have the money and people with the disabilities are asking they have the money, why can't we get some?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.26am BST
block-time published-time 4.13am BST 
enltrI've asked to be the House Crossbenchers' rep on the committee. It's important that this inquiry takes a thorough sensible approach. #auspol           https://t.co/RBy6j0jRtM
 - ?? Zali Steggall MP (@zalisteggall) September 19, 2019
block-time published-time 4.11am BST 
We are all slowly going through the budget outcome statement, but one thing which has been pointed out to me, is that with spending down, GST is also down. That is not a problem for the feds, because the corporate tax intake has increased. But as we all know, the states don't get corporate tax.
Which, for budgets like Tasmania, is going to be pretty diabolical. 
The Tasmanian Liberal government included a couple of lines about their exposure to GST changes in the 2018-19 budget:
More immediately, the risks to Tasmania's GST revenue estimates are linked directly to the state's share of the national population; the size of the GST revenue pool; and Tasmania's relativity factor which is currently forecast to fall over the forward estimates. GST revenue collections are highly sensitive to changes in national consumer spending patterns, as has been evidenced by a recent increase in the national pool forecasts in the Australian government's 2018-19 budget. 
There is a one-to-one relationship between variations in the size of the national pool of GST available for distribution to the states and variations in GST revenue to Tasmania. For example, a 1% variation in the GST pool would result in a $24.3m variation in Tasmania's GST revenue in 2018-19, assuming that the state's population share and assessed relativity remained constant. 
With GST down by 3.4%, which is just over $2bn, then Tasmania is looking at losing just over $80m (calculation mistakes are mine).
Given the fight Tasmania just had to have its federal housing debt wiped, with that saved money now tied to new housing projects and nothing else, this is not good news for Tasmania. And it won't be for the states as a whole.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.18am BST
block-time published-time 4.06am BST 
The Australian Council of Social Services has also responded to the final budget outcome statement released today. It says there is no excuse now not to increase Newstart: 
As Acoss warned, tax cuts don't seem to be having the promised effect and now is not the time to bring forward tax cuts slated for 2022.
The most effective measure for the economy now is to increase Newstart. With the budget in balance, the government is running out of excuses for not boosting the incomes of people who need the greatest relief. The government should prepare now to announce a major boost for people on the lowest incomes and a substantial social housing infrastructure package in the budget statement at the end of the year, because the tax cuts are not delivering the boost we need," Acoss CEO Cassandra Goldie sad today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.07am BST
block-time published-time 4.05am BST 
The Australian Industry Group has responded to  Christian Porter 's proposed IR reforms - calling for the length of enterprise agreements to be uncapped for all  pay deals, not just new work sites, and opposing increased penalties for wage theft. AiG chief executive Innes Willox :
Enterprise agreements that cover work on major projects should be able to continue for the life of the project even if this is longer than the current four-year limit. This reform should not be limited to greenfields agreements. Regular enterprise agreements commonly regulate work on major projects; not just greenfields agreements.
The second discussion paper on Strengthening Penalties for Non-compliance needs very careful consideration. Deliberate underpayment of wages is of course unacceptable, and strong laws are already in place to deter and punish this unlawful conduct. The civil penalties for breaching awards and pay record-keeping requirements were increased by up to 20 times in 2017, and a well-resourced regulator (the fair work ombudsman) is in place to enforce the laws. The current hefty civil penalties are appropriate. Exposing employers to criminal penalties, including imprisonment, for underpayments would risk discouraging investment and employment.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.10am BST
block-time published-time 3.57am BST 
 John Setka referred to Senate privileges committee  
As expected, the Senate supported Rex Patrick's call for a referral of John Setka to the privileges committee (which decides if someone has attempted to intimidate a member, among its many duties) over comments he made about Rex Patrick and Jacqui Lambie. The AFP is also investigating whether there was a threat. Setka denies any attempt at intimidation or threatening behaviour and said it was "campaigning"
The CFMEU have responded with a statement: 
We welcome the opportunity to appear before the Senate standing committee of privileges. 
Australian construction unions have run targeted political campaigns in support of workers safety and conditions for more than 100 years. 
When politicians contemplate supporting draconian industrial relations laws that will threaten workers' rights our members expect us to stand up and campaign against them. 
The suggestion that campaigning against legislation which undermines the human rights of workers and their representatives is in any way in contempt of the Senate is anti-democratic and sets a dangerous precedent. 
The use of illegally obtained recordings of a private meeting against CFMEU officials also raises serious ethical questions. 
We look forward to attending the privileges committee and will happily answer any questions from senators.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.06am BST
block-time published-time 3.53am BST 
At least someone is having fun today
enltrCaption this ?? pic.twitter.com/URk0uKf71p
 - Peter Whish-Wilson (@SenatorSurfer) September 19, 2019
block-time published-time 3.50am BST 
 Jim Chalmers  and Katy Gallagher have issued their official response to the 2018-19 final budget outcome statement:
The defining feature of the 2018-19 final budget outcome is a $4.6bn underspend in the national disability insurance scheme.
These new numbers show the Morrison government is propping up their budget by denying Australians with a disability the care they need, deserve and were promised.
Even with a $4.6bn underspend on the NDIS, higher iron ore prices and a lower dollar boosting profits and the bottom line, the budget is still in deficit.
This is the sixth consecutive budget deficit from a Liberal government which promised surpluses in the first year and every year after that.
Today's result confirms that net debt has more than doubled under the Liberals from $175bn in 2013 to $374bn now.
 The government shouldn't be patting themselves on the back about today's numbers.
Australia has the slowest growth in a decade, stagnant wages, productivity in decline, record household debt, high underemployment, and declining living standards.
Right when the Australian economy needs action to get the economy moving again, the Liberals have a political strategy but not an economic policy.
Shortchanging Australians with a disability is not an economic policy.
It is time Josh Frydenberg and Scott Morrison brought forward a budget update to update their forecasts and properly outline an economic plan that supports the floundering economy and better safeguards it from global risks."
They'll be saying the same things in different ways at their presser at 1pm.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.54am BST
block-time published-time 3.48am BST 
 Julia Gillard  is delivering her state of the nation address, speaking about the impact mental health can have on the workforce. 
block-time published-time 3.47am BST 
 Unemployment edges higher  
It's seasonally adjusted, but but worth noting because the consensus was it would stay stable at 5.2% and instead has increased slightly, to 5.3%.
From Australian Associated Press:
The jobless rate edged higher to a seasonally adjusted 5.3% in August, bolstering the case for another Reserve Bank rate cut as soon as October.
A surge in people with part-time work boosted net employment by 34,700 to 12.93 million during the month, but underemployment ticked higher on a 15,500 decrease in people with full-time work.
Most economists had expected the unemployment rate to remain unchanged at 5.2% for a fifth consecutive month, despite dual rate cuts by the Reserve Bank and federal government tax stimulus supposedly initiated to counter jobs market slack, low wages growth and low household consumption levels. 
Unemployment was the key metric cited by the RBA in its decision to cut rates in both June and July to a record low 1.0% with a third cut to 0.75% already completely priced in for November. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50am BST
block-time published-time 3.33am BST 
 Matt Canavan has just put the answers up: 
 1. As at 31 July 2019, the NAIF Board has committed $1.4bn through 11 investment decisions and two conditional approvals. The NAIF dollar value of the 11 investment decisions is $1.2bn. 
2. As at 31 July 2019, a total of $38,522,982.40 had been drawn across three projects. Access to NAIF loan money through drawdowns is dependent on the proponent requirements and timing of construction and project activities. Loan money is not drawn in one large sum. 
3. Projects have access to a draw down facility when they reach financial close. As at 31 July 2019, the three projects that had reached financial close were: Onslow Marine Supply Base, Voyages Indigenous Tourism Australia and Humpty Doo Barramundi. 
4. As at 31 July 2019, the amount drawn down for each of the three projects referred to in question 3 was: Onslow Marine Supply Base - $13,436,538; Voyages Indigenous Tourism Limited - $23,732,693.30; Humpty Doo Barramundi - $1,353,751.10. 
5. As at 31 July 2019, there was 87 active activities in the NAIF pipeline, classified as follows: 48 active enquiries (NAIF has received an initial enquiry from the proponent and requested the proponent provide high level project information); one at the strategic assessment stage; 28 at the due diligence stage; seven at the investment decision and execution stage; three having reached financial close. 
6. Refer to question 5. 
7. Refer to question 5. 
8. Refer to question 5.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.36am BST
block-time published-time 3.32am BST 
The Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund is something I know gets forgotten a bit, but I keep an eye on, because it is really, really important to people in regional Queensland and the Northern Territory. It was meant to turn northern Australia into, in Tony Abbott's words, "an economic powerhouse". It has not done that. Mostly because it is taking so long to get major projects off the ground.
Queensland senator Murray Watt had some questions on the fund recently, which were put on notice. 
 1. What is the total value of the NAIF's investment decisions to date. 
2. In aggregate, how much of that funding has been released via the draw down facility. 
3. What projects have access to a draw down facility. 
4. How much has each of those projects drawn down.
 5. How many projects are currently in the enquiry and preliminary assessment stage. 
6. How many projects are currently in the strategic assessment stage. 
7. How many projects are currently in the due diligence stage. 
8. How many projects are in the investment decision and execution stage. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.34am BST
block-time published-time 3.18am BST 
In the question and answer session, Christian Porter  praised the Shop Distributing and Allied Employees Association (SDA) as an example of a union that is "very constructive" in the enterprise bargaining process and "sensible". 
"I was speaking with McDonald's the other day - and they were describing how they encourage issues or information about practices a worker thinks can be improved direct to the management and they deal with them swiftly and quickly and they have a great cooperative relationship with the SDA where the SDA also passes that information on."
The SDA is a controversial example because at major employers including McDonald's,            Coles and            Woolworths, the union agreed to enterprise agreements that traded off the penalty rates of casual staff, allowing the employers to lawfully pay millions less than otherwise required by the award. 
When Labor wanted to ban the Fair Work Commission from penalty rates, Coalition figures including MP George Christensen  and the Council of Small Business Organisations of Australia were extremely critical of the SDA for cutting penalty rates and allowing big employers a big advantage over smaller competitors. 
Asked at the doorstop how he could call for upward pressure on wages while praising the SDA, Porter said the SDA "seems generally speaking to work very well with the large employers in that sector" and disputed that they had left workers worse off.
"I'm not sure the SDA would agree with your assessment of the overall result of their engagement with employer associations in that sector."
Porter said he meant the SDA is more constructive about disputes than the construction union, which he said faked safety concerns.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.21am BST
block-time published-time 2.59am BST 
 Christian Porter  has just spoken to the Committee for the Economic Development of Australia state of the nation conference, dropping lots of hints about IR reforms.
The industrial relations minister said that he's first looking for improvements "of the most importance to strengthening the Australian economy" and secondly they must be "actually possible" in that they "can achieve a significant enough degree of consensus that they can be supported through parliament".
He repeated the framework articulated by  Scott Morrison  that reforms need to:
    • Create jobs and put upward pressure on wages to benefit workers
    • Help business by boosting productivity; and
    • Help the economy grow overall
Because the ghost of WorkChoices looms over all IR discussion, Porter argued that it was "mistaken" and a "false view" the system is a perpetual contest between employers and employees.
Porter hopes he can end the "revolving door" of IR reform by finding reforms that are mutually beneficial.
Porter praised Julia Gillard 's Fair Work Act as a "far from terrible" starting point, praising Australia's system of independent minimum wage setting which has produced the highest minimum wage in the world.
The Australian Council of Trade Union's Change the Rules campaign - by contrast - was made up of "foreign and radical policy prescriptions" such as taxpayer subsidies of wages in the childcare sector. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02am BST
block-time published-time 2.43am BST 
No word on when Jim Chalmers is going to respond to the budget statement as yet, but he is tweeting: 
enltrBREAKING: New numbers show the Liberals' spent $19 billion on interest on their record gross debt of $542 billion last year #auspol           #ausecon           #fbo
 - Jim Chalmers MP (@JEChalmers) September 19, 2019
block-time published-time 2.41am BST 
For some reason Mark Coulton just introduced an NDIS bill into the House - not  Stuart Robert, the actual minister.
Which is a bit weird. It's Robert's job. Christian Porter  who has a pretty insane workload, seems to make it into the chamber to introduce his bills.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.04am BST
block-time published-time 2.38am BST 
There was no traditional departure shot, but nothing stops Mike Bowers 
enltrPM Morrison boards his flight this morning in Canberra, next stop Trump town USA @AmyRemeikis           @murpharoo           @msmarto           @GuardianAus           #PoliticsLive           pic.twitter.com/KMenDABLRK
 - Mikearoo (@mpbowers) September 19, 2019
block-time published-time 2.32am BST 
Let's be clear here. The same person who believes abortions lead to increased breast cancer rates despite no evidence; who said the assault on Tony Abbott during the marriage equality debate was "[This] is just a bit of a foretaste of what will come should the yes campaigners feel even more empowered in the event that they were successful with the vote... This is just a bit of a harbinger of what is likely to occur"; that the marriage equality debate wasn't necessary because a lot of gay people didn't want to marry - pointing to Italian designers Domenico Dolce  and Stefano Gabbana as proof, and goodness knows what else, is comparing an academic website to Hitler, because it is following its academic duty and refusing to humour climate change deniers.
Climate. Change. Is. Happening. No one can be "climate change agnostic". The climate is literally changing. Around us. Siberia was on fire. The ice is melting. Oceans are getting warmer and rising. And Australia is in the grips of a drought that in some areas, has been going on for almost 10 years. WITH NO RAIN TO COME. Communities are running out of water. It is literally National party policy to pray for rain.
There is no room and no time to humour climate change deniers. No room. To compare that to Hitler and Stalin is absolute bullshit propaganda and deserves all of the scorn. All of it. Especially since actual Nazis are once again running around in the sunlight. ACTUAL Nazis. 
enltrcome up with your own jokes abetz this one is @firstdogonmoon 's ??            https://t.co/JFYmsFcD0D           #auspol           @AmyRemeikis           pic.twitter.com/IGgVrOMf0P
 - Dave Earley (@earleyedition) 
September 19, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.39am BST
block-time published-time 2.15am BST 
 Eric Abetz continued, because of course he did: 
As an agnostic in the climate change debate, I accept that there are scientists of good faith on all sides. 
I'm willing to listen, to try to discern and determine where the facts actually lie. To so superciliously and arrogantly deny a voice to an alternative point of view is reminiscent of totalitarian regimes. 
The orthodoxy, it seems, shall prevail not through rational debate, scientific endeavour and reasoning, but by crushing, shunning and banning any opposing views. 
But it is through challenging, questioning, probing, asking and debating that we learn, discover and innovate. Inquiring minds look beyond orthodoxies, independently assessing issues. 
It's what has got us to where we are today. We can learn more, will learn more and, indeed, need to learn more, but only if we don't stifle the inquiring mind. For well over half a century we've been subjected to environmental prophets of doom who've proven to be false. 
Prophecies have told us the USA would be on food rations and water rations by 1980. 
We've been told the Brisbane River wouldn't flood again. Since that prophecy, it's happened not once, but twice. We've been told the Murray River wouldn't flow out to sea again. Since that prophecy, it has. And the list goes on, including the death, senator Dean Smith, of the city of Perth. 
Well, last time I looked I think it still existed! So please forgive our fellow Australians who are willing to ask the questions. 
When the United Nations have, for more than 30 years, predicted we only have 10 years left to fix climate change, we're entitled to ask why their predictions have been wrong. Given the undisputed legacy of unfulfilled predictions, people are entitled to question and to put an alternative viewpoint. 
This ugly, unscientific, totalitarian, arrogant approach taken by the Conversation is the exact opposite to the principles of scientific endeavour. The lesson of history is the truth will out and the inquiring mind will ultimately prevail. 
The Conversation can stop the conversation, but it cannot stop the march of inquiring minds that will ultimately determine this issue. The taxpayers, who indirectly fund this publication, deserve so much better. 
The Conversation needs to live up to its name.
 Related:  Eric Abetz compares The Conversation to Nazis over stance on climate change denial
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.20am BST
block-time published-time 2.12am BST 
You might have seen the Eric Abetz  story. A search of "Hitler" in the Senate Hansard shows the whole speech: 
Tonight I call on the publication which calls itself the Conversation to live up to its name. 
Yesterday, its daily newsletter arrogantly determined to stop conversation. The lack of self-awareness is as cringeworthy as it is acute. 
The Conversation stopping conversation on the topic of - you've guessed it! - climate change is to deny its banner and its very reason for existence. 
Why, you may ask, would the Conversation deny its own name? The answer, colleagues, is in the heading of the newsletter, 'Climate change deniers are dangerous - they don't deserve a place on our site'. 
Allow me to give you a few quotes: once upon a time, we might have viewed climate sceptics as merely frustrating ... it's 2019, and ... we know better. That's why ... a zero-tolerance approach to moderating climate change deniers, and sceptics. Not only will we be removing their comments, we'll be locking their account ......
As a reader, author or commenter, we need your help. If you see something that is misinformation, please don't engage, simply report it ... Dob them in and help us create a space where they don't derail the conversation. 
 Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin  and Mao Zedong  couldn't have put it better themselves. 
They'd be so proud! 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.18am BST
block-time published-time 2.09am BST 
 Question: One of the things you guys like to talk about a lot is how you pay down Labor's debt. Since 2012/13 it's gone from 10% of GDP to 20% of GDP and interest payments of $15bn. Why has it increased so much and isn't it the case you're not paying it down?
 Mathias Cormann: 
We introduced a forward trajectory not just in deep deficit but deteriorating. We have turned that around and we are in balance and you only pay down debt when you are in balance. 
Having said that, the borrowing requirements in net debt terms have reduced in the 18/19 financial year and the reason why there's an uptick in net debt is because of the valuation in relation to the government securities, and that's essentially an adjustment that is not based on borrowing needs, it is based on what's happening with the valuation of government securities.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.11am BST
block-time published-time 1.58am BST 
 Question: We have a lift in corporate taxation, a strong lift in PAYG, but household spending through GST is $4bn lower than what you projected a year ago. Do you reconcile the fact you have more people in work but they are spending far less?
 Josh Frydenberg:  
Obviously we want household consumption to be higher, Shane, and as you know household consumption is 60% of GDP. 
One of the ways we can drive that is through the tax relief that is being legislated through the parliament. 
The last two budgets, more than $300bn. You have heard from the Reserve Bank governor, while some people are paying down the debt without tax relief that is slowing their way, others are spending it in the economy, and it will boost disposable income. 
Obviously, we want to see household consumption higher but we are pleased the housing market has stabilised, in terms of the clearance rate, which are now significantly higher than they were this time last year. 
Prices in the key markets of Sydney and Melbourne have lifted, and the benefit of the 50 basis point rate cut was not fully seen in the June quarter, and obviously we will be seeing more in the September quarter, so too with the tax cuts, and of course the infrastructure spending. 
We are taking action to lift household consumption but there is also uncertainty out there, and I don't think anyone wants to overlook that fact. There is uncertainty in the global economic outlook and that impact on investment decisions here at home.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.02am BST
block-time published-time 1.55am BST 
 Question: Despite the final budget outcome, you are 1.9% down from 3% forecast. Business investment down, household investment down, and individual tax revenue down. Doesn't that disprove your assertion that...
 Josh Frydenberg:  
What we have announced is that nominal GDP is above what was forecast, and the Australian economy continues to grow. 
As the prime minister, the finance minister and I have said, looking internationally, big economies like Germany, the UK, Sweden, Singapore, Hong Kong and others, they experienced negative growth, and unemployment is now at 5.2%.
We will get some labour force numbers today so we will see what happens there, but unemployment was 5.7% when we came to government, it is now 5.2%, and the real strength of the economy has come from that strong labour market, which the RBA governor has actually talked about himself.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.02am BST
block-time published-time 1.54am BST 
 Question: Just on the NDIS underspend - $4.6bn, turning out to consolidated revenue, shouldn't that go into disability services in some way?
 Mathias Cormann: 
Ultimately, 100% of the demand in the community will be met. Across the budget, across all of the demand driven programs, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, hospitals, aged care, the NDIS, whether it is a pension - the government will cover the cost of the demand that is there to its fullest extent. 
It makes absolutely no sense to put money aside when the money will be there. Essentially, in any budget, at any budget update you have movements up and down. 
You have demand that is higher than expected and you have to pay more. Sometimes you have demand lower-than-expected. The situation with the NDIS is unique, because we are going for a massive transition. 
We are going through a transition from estate-based funding arrangement, where there was a lot of unmet demand and a lot of inadequate support for Australians with a disability, to a situation where every Australian ultimately who has a demand for visibility services, will receive that support tailored to their needs.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.02am BST
block-time published-time 1.44am BST 
From Josh Frydenberg's office:
These outcomes demonstrate that the government's economic plan is working and confirm that the budget will be back in the black and back on track for the 2019-20 year. 
Importantly Australia has completed its 28th consecutive year of economic growth and maintained its AAA credit rating. 
With more than 1.4 million jobs having been created since the Coalition Government was first elected in 2013, today's outcome reflects the record number of people in jobs and an economy which is benefiting from the free trade agreements (FTAs) negotiated by the Coalition over the last six years. 
Our FTAs combined with strong prices for our key commodities exports has seen the current account move into surplus for the first time since 1975. 
Nominal GDP grew by 5.3% in 2018-19, which was significantly stronger than the 2018-19 Budget forecast of 3 ¾ per cent. This was the result of stronger than-expected employment growth and higher-than-assumed prices for key commodities.
The final budget outcome for 2018-19 further demonstrates that the government's economic plan is working to create more jobs, and to ensure Australia can continue to afford the essential services Australians rely on.
In the year ahead the economy will continue to be supported by the government's economic plan as outlined in the 2019-20 budget, including the largest tax cuts in two decades, and our $100 billion pipeline of infrastructure investment. 
The final budget outcome 2018-19 can be found at www.budget.gov.au.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.04am BST
block-time published-time 1.41am BST 
 Federal operating budget comes in at $700m deficit for 2018/19  
 Josh Frydenberg (who is not yelling and for that we are all grateful)
The Australian economy is strong and ready for the challenges ahead. 
As a result of the Morrison government's economic plan and responsible economic management, the underlying cash balance in the final budget outcome for the 19/20 year is $13.8bn better than estimated at the time of the 2018/19 budget.
The deficit of $690m represents 0.7% of gross domestic product.
A growing economy with more jobs and stronger terms of trade than anticipated at the time of the 2018/19 budget has driven total receipts $11.5bn higher, with payments $6.6bn lower than expected at the time of the 2018/19 budget. 
Employment growth far exceeded expectations at the time of delivering the 2018/19 budget in May 2018. 
With about 300,000 additional jobs created in 2018/19, employment grew by 2.6%, well above the 1.5% growth forecast in the 2018/19 budget. 
More than nine out of 10 jobs created in the last year were in full-time employment, with the proportion of those of working age in welfare now at its lowest level in 30 years. 
More jobs drives increases in revenue, as well as lower payments with individual tax receipts $5.7bn compared to the 2018/19 budget forecast. 
Our strong fiscal management has put the budget on a sustainable trajectory, ensuring that we can guarantee the essential services that Australians need and deserve. 
The 2018/19 final budget outcome shows that we've kept spending as a share of GDP at 24.6%, below the long-run average of 24.7%, for the second consecutive year, while also providing record levels of investment in essential services, like hospitals, schools and aged.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.06am BST
block-time published-time 1.36am BST 
It is like economics Christmas today.
Job figures and budget outcomes.
The government will get to point that it is well on track to delivering its operating surplus in the next financial year.
But the markets are still very cautious, with commentators expecting the ongoing slow employment growth (despite jobs being added to the economy, the jobless rate has not shifted and that is not expected to change today) will mean the RBA will once again cut rates - if not in October, than November.
The government has been helped a lot by iron ore prices going through the roof. But that can't last forever. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.41am BST
block-time published-time 1.33am BST 
 Linda Burney: 
 This prime minister is obsessed with urine tests, saliva swabs and cashless cards - and young Australians and their families are right to ask themselves:
 Where is the evidence to support these policies?
 How will this help me find a job?
 How will this help me pay the bills?
 How will this make things easier to raise and build a good and healthy life for my family? 
 Why isn't this government doing anything to stimulate a weak economy and that is only getting weaker?
 What is the point of the Morrison government?
 This prime minister and this Liberal National government - and their refusal to stimulate the economy - is creating an economic environment that is making it so difficult for young Australians to raise and build a life for their families.
 Of course Labor supports the bill, but there is much more that needs to be done.
 Which is why Labor has moved a second reading amendment calling for the government to
(a)Guarantee it will not make any cuts to Paid Parental Leave;
(b)Increase paid family violence leave  [and Labor wants to see two weeks paid family violence leave] ; and
(c)Work with business to close the gender pay gap.
 The government has absolutely no reason not to support this amendment - and I commend it to the House.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.42am BST
block-time published-time 1.33am BST 
 Linda Burney is attempting to move an amendment to the paid parental leave amendment bill (yes, I know): 
The prime minister is more obsessed with devising new ways to humiliate, harass and prod younger Australians who are simply trying to enter the workforce and build a life for their families.
Last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to pursue its ideologically driven, ineffective, indiscriminate and very expensive cashless card - which will make it more difficult for young people trying to re-enter the workforce to purchase essential items and basics at affordable prices. 
Last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to force young people trying to enter the workforce eat more into their savings before they can access income support.
And last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to make it more difficult for single parents to access the Education Entry Supplement to undertake further study.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.10am BST
block-time published-time 1.30am BST 
Don't think anyone has forgotten that the government has allowed Pauline Hanson  legitimacy to attack domestic violence victims (saying she believes women are making up claims to win custody battles is happening on a large enough scale that the whole court needs a revamp is just outrageous) by making her deputy chair of its family court inquiry.
I just caught the tail end of Linda Burney's speech to the chamber: 
"It is up to the government to explain how it can possibly support an inquiry whose deputy chair doesn't even acknowledge the prevalence and gendered nature of family violence."
Yup. 
block-time published-time 1.26am BST 
Both Josh Frydenberg and Mathias Cormann will be speaking on the final budget statement press conference.
It is in the Blue Room, so you know it is a two-flag affair. MINIMUM.
block-time published-time 1.14am BST 
 Richard Marles had some advice for Scott Morrison :
It is very much in Australia's interests that America is an outward-looking trading nation and what it's about is seeking to build an open global trading economy. 
Obviously when there are trade tensions between America and China that is not good for the global economy actually, but it's certainly not good for the Australian economy and it's really important that Scott Morrison is making that case to president Trump. 
And you know, I get that he'll be enjoying being there with his mate and he'll like all the happy snaps and that's all fine. But at the end of the day the prime minister is going to be judged on what outcomes he achieves and what he brings back.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.16am BST
block-time published-time 12.38am BST 
Christian Porter has released a discussion paper on industrial relations.
Paul Karp wrote about it here :
 Related:  Wage theft: Coalition says tough new penalties won't apply for 'genuine mistakes'
This is the official line from his office: 
Attorney-general and minister for industrial relations, Christian Porter, said the vast majority of employers try to do the right thing by their workers, but a strong deterrent was needed for the minority who deliberately exploit their staff.
As well as criminal sanctions, the discussion paper examines a range of issues associated with underpayments, including civil penalties, sham contracting and the question of liability for employers where entities in their supply network flout employment laws.
A separate discussion paper was released today, examining the issue of Project Life Greenfields Agreements. Under the Fair Work Act, enterprise agreements can only apply for a maximum of four years after approval.
While the majority of new projects are finalised within that timeframe, larger projects can take longer and require cost certainty to enable them to be completed on time and on budget.
The question the government is now seeking feedback on is whether agreements could be extended to cover the full-life of a project, instead of the current four-year maximum term.
The government is also asking what additional safeguards could be built into those agreements to ensure workers are not disadvantaged as the result of any changes.
The papers can be viewed at :            https://www.ag.gov.au/Consultations/Pages/industrial-relations-consultation.aspx
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.41am BST
block-time published-time 12.25am BST 
The bells are ringing, and truly, they are the only sign of life in this place today.
It is flat. Very, very flat.
block-time published-time 12.13am BST 
Oh goodie. It's 'government seeking increased powers to deal with terrorists' time.
 Peter Dutton  wants more powers to strip terrorist suspects of their citizenship. The current laws aren't exactly getting a thumbs up from our security agencies, but hey. Sure.
Here is what the national security monitor had to say about the current laws and            here is what Asio had to say.
 Related:  National security monitor challenges Dutton on citizenship-stripping laws
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.16am BST
block-time published-time 11.58pm BST 
Totally normal 
enltrDutton in the Fed Chamber yesterday questioned why Labor hadn't asked him about the Biloela family since parliament returned last week. pic.twitter.com/aklMJJCpmt
 - Josh Taylor (@joshgnosis) 
September 18, 2019
block-time published-time 11.38pm BST 
It is also the Ceda State of the Nation forum today (and tomorrow), where speakers, including Julia Gillard, will deliver addresses on how Australia is going on a global scale.
It's being held at Parliament House, so if you want to follow along, you can here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.55pm BST
block-time published-time 11.31pm BST 
The ball started quite late last night, because there were a couple of last-minute divisions. 
Which means we had shots like this:
    Christian Porter during a late division in the House of Representatives before the Midwinter Ball. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Trent Zimmerman during a late division. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian   
One of the reasons was the "strengthening the character test" migration bill amendments (gotta love that 1984 language!) which Labor is opposing. Basically, just being convicted of a low-level crime, even if there is no sentence imposed, is enough to deny you a visa, or have you kicked out. Our New Zealand neighbours are quite upset about it, given the rash of deportations of people who may have been born in NZ but never lived there, which is happening already. 
 Andrew Giles had a bit to say about it: 
At a time when so many electors are so disenchanted with our politics we don't need unnecessary conflict in this place, which this bill, as presented, is. 
The government should have made a compelling case for expanding powers further. They should have set out a rationale, but they have failed to do so. 
They have failed to even try. This has been all about the politics and not about the policy, and this has been demonstrated in the summary way in which the minister responded to the concerns and proposals put forward by the Labor party to try to find a way through. 
There is no disagreement of principle here when it comes to the important role of the character test and the broad discretionary powers which are necessary to go with it. These are things that we support now, as we did in 2014. 
But what we have here is a failure by the government to have regard to the consequences of its actions and a failure of the government to look to the national interest in progressing significant legislation impacting on people's lives.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.34pm BST
block-time published-time 11.22pm BST 
To give credit where it is due, Michael McCormack  did hunt me down last night to say he had heard I was coming down with smallpox (my reaction yesterday to remembering he would be acting prime minister on a sitting day, and therefore question time) and he hoped I felt better. Not a lot of politicians would try and have a laugh with the journalist who refers to them by a variety of bland foods, so snaps for that. But still. Question time is going to be excruciating. 
    Deputy PM Michael McCormack and Catherine Shaw. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.26pm BST
block-time published-time 11.18pm BST 
Mike Bowers was there to catch the arrivals:
    Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong arrive for the Midwinter Ball. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Scott and Jenny Morrison. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Josh and Aimee Frydenberg and Ed Husic (left). Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Zali Steggall and Tim Irvine. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Anne Aly and David Allen. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.22pm BST
block-time published-time 11.04pm BST 
The Midwinter Ball was held overnight, and in good news:
enltrLast night raised $340,000 for charity with thanks to sponsors and the leaders including @ScottMorrisonMP           @AlboMP           @RichardMarlesMP           @lindareynoldswa and            @JoshFrydenberg who backed the charity auction. Thank you.
- David Crowe (@CroweDM) 
September 18, 2019
Which is a good outcome. The speeches were officially on the record for the first time (although given you know Malcolm Turnbull once did a Donald Trump impersonation and Paul Keating 's Placido Domingo speech, you could say they were never really off the record).
You didn't miss much. Sharri Markson and David Speers  jointly won press gallery journalist of the year. 
 Daryl Braithwaite was the entertainment. I assume Horses was performed on repeat (I left after the speeches).
Speaking of the speeches, both Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese made jokes about the 1997 Engadine McDonalds rumour (google it, if you don't get the reference). 
 Morrison: 
I note the great collective that runs the gallery has, in its infinite wisdoms, as I said, decided to put tonight's speech officially on the record. Sure, your call. But now you won't get here my views on RBA policy, the South China Sea, John Hewson...
What's currently in the Coalition agreement.
What I think about the contents of Nikki Savva's book, I reckon she knows, or, most importantly, what really happened at the Engadine McDonald's in 1997!
It will remain the mystery of the ages.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13pm BST
block-time published-time 10.56pm BST 
 Good morning  
Happy Acting Prime Minister Michael McCormack Day!
I was up all night I was so excited.
It's all because Scott Morrison  is on his way to the United States, where he will be the guest of honour at only the second State Dinner Donald Trump has thrown. 
As he flies off, Josh Frydenberg  will hand down the final budget statement, which is the how-did-those-treasury-predictions-actually-pan-out statement. He is pretty excited by it, so I think those iron ore prices have given a better-than-expected bump at just the right time for the economy.
But that means it is also a big day for Jim Chalmers. And there is also the unemployment figures due today. But all in all, it should be pretty low ebb. It's parliament Friday, and everyone is a bit sick of each other by this time in the sitting cycle, and keen to get back to their homes. 
 Katharine Murphy  is travelling with the PM, but you have Sarah Martin and Paul Karp  and what is left of me at this point of the sitting. It's not a lot, but it is yours. 
 Mike Bowers, who didn't finish work until close to midnight because of the midwinter ball, is also out and about. I'll bring you some of that very soon. 
I really need another coffee. And an egg sandwich. While I look for those, let's get into it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02pm BST
  10689 2019-09-19T06:45:00Z true 2019-09-18T22:01:28Z false false 2019-09-19T07:34:23Z false AUS theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/cc2e7 false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/70d1e08bb20a987a9e19a2d6454a06d7cc3e3046/0_340_5184_3110/500.jpg false en And on that note, and mostly because I have reached my capacity to deal with this today, we are going to call it a night and put the blog to sleep until October, when parliament resumes. That sound you hear is the anticipation of the rush to the airport, because everyone is quite done with today. Parliament will resume on 14 October for the third-last joint sitting week for the year. There are separate House and Senate sitting weeks, but just three joint sitting weeks left. Huzzah. Make sure you check back at the Guardian - I'll be back on regular political news duties, Katharine Murphy is travelling with the prime minister and will have the US trip news and Paul Karp and Sarah Martin will have everything else and more. A massive thank you to Mike Bowers, who is somehow still standing, and to everyone else at the Guardian's braintrust for keeping it all going. And most of all, a massive thank you to you for joining us this sitting. We will be back in just under a month, but please, in the meantime - take care of you. How Mike Bowers saw question time: Zali Steggall will be joining the climate strike in Sydney, with her office: The Not Business as Usual campaign has attracted thousands of businesses pledging to close their doors to send a message that governments must take urgent against climate change. Strikes are planned in 120 countries, including more than 140 protest locations across Australia, three days before the UN Climate Action summit in New York. Zali and her team will be catching the Manly ferry to the protest that begins at 12pm at the Domain in Sydney's CBD. "Global warming is an issue that impacts us all. We all have a responsibility to call for more preventative action by the government," Ms Steggall said. "We are on track to burden the next generation with its greatest intergenerational debt ever and I do not find that acceptable." "I encourage as many people to join me on the strike to send a strong message to the government that we will not sit idly by as the detrimental effects of climate change such as terrible health impacts are being felt." The local Warringah office will remain open for constituents with urgent issues. Michael McCormack calls time on question time for the "Morrison-McCormack government" and I call time on my ability to stomach any more of this, so everyone is a winner. Lisa Chesters to Michael McCormack: Can the acting prime minister confirm that the government has managed the delivery of the inland rail project so badly that it has alienated key support groups, including the New South Wales farmers Association, Agfa force, the Victorian Farmers Federation, Country Women's Association and the National Farmers Federation? McCormack: I just wish the member for Bendigo was perhaps a little more positive around the inland rail. This is going to be a transformational, nation building, 1,700km corridor of commerce. Is going to, for the first time, product from paddock to port within 24 hours. This is absolutely critical for rural and regional Australia. All the other in rural and regional members of the Labor side, of whom that not many, should get on board. Every single member of the parliament should get on board. I know those on our side are in favour of inland rail which reduces rail freight costs by up to $94 per tonne. It was and it certainly predicated on a saving of $10 per tonne. The CSIRO report indicated there was potential savings of $94 savings. An average saving of $76 per tonne saving as opposed to $10 per tonne on the original case although I can say that in parts of my electorate where parts of the rail are rapidly under way, how many jobs that is created in just that particular area. Yes, I understand that there are concerns. I appreciate there are people further permit the inland rail will have an impact. He is still talking but I have had way too much Michael McCormack for one day and possibly a lifetime, so check the Hansard if you are that desperate. Or maybe stare at a wall. Same thing, really. Nope wait, Michael McCormack lures me back with this: Mr Speaker, they burnt the Murray-Darling Basin plan, the draft of the plan, they were so aggravated with his water resource ideas, they were so absolutely aggrieved with the position he took, and if those opposite had won on May 18, Mr Speaker, they would have been back in May. Most of the water of the Murray-Darling, what little water there is, would be out of the mouth of the Murray, because that is their policy. When not going to do that, and we won't be deterred by the Victorian water minister, Lisa Neville, who said ruling out dams in the southern state - "new dams do not create any more water, they just take it from somewhere else". I ask if they agree with that, Mr Speaker." That is the literal truth of a dam. I could dig one in my backyard and water would not fill it, because dams need water to come from somewhere else, be it an underwater well, a river, lake or the fricking sky. Without that water from somewhere else, it is just a giant hole. Look, Michael McCormack is still talking, but I just found a piece of puffed rice from an old rice cracker on my desk and I got distracted by its sudden charisma. Michael McCormack tells Joel Fitzgibbon he "does not get bullied by anyone" and I just spat out my tea. Anthony Albanese to Michael McCormack: My question is to the person currently leading the McCormick government. He wanted me to say that. The acting prime minister, Mr Speaker. What is the government doing to ensure that journalism is not a crime? McCormack: Mr Speaker, as a former journalist with 21 years as a daily newspaper editor, I of course believe in freedom of press. The press. The government is committed to the freedom of the press. It is central to our democracy. It always has been, is now, always will be. It is also the government 's first duty to keep Australians safe. That is the first priority Mr Speaker. These considerations need to be carefully balanced. The government has asked the parliamentary joint media on intelligence and security to inquire into the impact of the exercise of law enforcement and intelligence powers on the freedom of the press. As the attorney general has just said, we thought that was bipartisan. At the committee's request and as agreed by the attorney general, the reporting date for this inquiry has been extended to 20th November. The search warrants executed by the Australian federal police to investigate under old laws that a Liberal National government repealed and replaced them with provisions for strong protections for journalists about this matter is now before the court, will not be appropriate to comment further. Operational decisions are a matter, as they have to be, for the AFP and remain independent of executive government. It is a way it should be. "Well done", says one of the ministers behind him, because at this stage, apparently getting through a question with words which approximate understandable sentences is cause for a gold star. Honestly. Flat lemonade has more pith. Angus Taylor looks like he is saying something. Next Richard Marles to Michael McCormack: My question is to the acting prime minister. What is the government's position on extending the so-called "big stick" legislation to supermarkets? (Insert Admiral Ackbar gif) Michael McCormack: I will get the energy minister to add to my remarks but I'll answer the question from the deputy opposition leader. The big stick legislation is important legislation but it is also very important because what we want to do is make sure that we have the most reliable, affordable, energy for Australians. That is what we've always said that is what we have certainly put in place. That why, at last, energy prices are coming down. Under those opposite, I have to say they couldn't even explain how much the energy costs were going to be for average businesses and acting families. Tony Burke: Does the issue of direct relevance as to whether someone reacts to a trigger word ordeals of the contents of the question. The context of the question is entirely about whether or not that legislation should apply to supermarkets and the deputy prime minister, the acting premise those going nowhere near that issue. Christian Porter: Mr Speaker, because there is no plan. The acting prime minister is speaking to the only part of the question that he can intelligibly speak to [in regards to] big stick legislation in relation to energy. Tony Smith: I will rule on the point of order first. The question was very specific. It did not contain a preamble. I was about to say to the deputy prime minister, the acting prime minister, of course he is entitled to a preamble on the issue but my... The scope of, obviously of a very specific question, is very limited in this respect and the other thing I was going to say. I thought I heard the acting prime minister say, he would at some point, refer to the energy minister stop there is a difficulty with that because unless he can convince me that the energy minister is responsible for supermarkets, that is the problem. We can refer to a minister who has portfolio responsibility for that area and obviously that could be a number of ministers but I think for the acting prime minister, he's been entitled to deal with the energy policy point up until now which he has done. I think that either he needs to go to the specific part of the question or refer it or we can move onto the next question. McCormack: We're taking on the energy companies. We make no apology for that. *insert gif of stormtrooper hitting head* And while we are taking moments, let's all take a moment to remember that Scott Morrison stepped in to save Craig Kelly from being rolled in his preselection, three years after Malcolm Turnbull stepped in and saved him from being rolled in his preselection. Jim Chalmers to Josh Frydenberg: Why won't the treasurer admit that today's budget outcome would not be possible without making Australians with a disability wait for the care that they need and deserve and were promised so that he can add $4.6bn to the budget line? Josh Frydenberg: The member for Rankin's claim is not true. That's it. That's the whole answer. Let's all take a moment to thank Frydenberg's voice for doing us a solid and deciding to fail in protest to all the unnecessary yelling. Well done, little dude. Centre Alliance's Rex Patrick has asked the Senate president Scott Ryan about reports that China was responsible for the hack of parliament's computer systems in February, which China dismissed as "baseless". Ryan replied that it would not be appropriate to comment but restated Scott Morrison's formulation that a "sophisticated state actor" was responsible. He said a small amount of data was taken but none was deemed sensitive. Network security is of the "highest priority" and Ryan promises to give a further update at Senate supplementary estimates. The science minister is now taking a lickspittle on why kids should get into science in the same hour as a member of her party just said climate change wasn't real because it is cold in some places and hot in others. Richard Di Natale has asked Mathias Cormann about Friday's climate strike and whether he can guarantee public servants won't be penalised for attend. Cormann said the Coalition is "committed to effective action on climate change". "All of the public servants know what their duties and responsibilities are and I encourage them to conduct appropriately with rules," he said. Hint, hint: don't skip work. Cormann said that "what people do in their free time is up to them" but he is not in favour of students going on strike. "Students should go to school, that will prepare them to be best possible contributors to their communities." "I know how we'll get through to the yoof! We'll send out the guy who always looks like he is yelling at you from a ute's window, to tell them easily googable information is a LIE! That'll get them. That's radical dude. So awake." - The monkeypodders, presumably. No one: Absolutely no one: Not a single soul: Craig Kelly: I understand how persuasive that peer group pressure can be for teenagers and their desire to conform and fit in with the crowd. However, I would say to any student considering joining the so-called climate protest, don't be a sheep and think for yourself because you are being used and manipulated and everything you are told is a lie. The facts are, there is no link between climate change and drought. Polar bears are increasing in number. Today's generation is safer from extreme weather at any time in human history. There is no 97% consensus. Such claims are a fraud. Crop yields have increased remarkably, wildfires have declined 25% over the past two decades, we are seeing less cyclones, not more. Cold weather kills many times more than hot weather, including here in Australia. The sea ice is not melting away. In fact, where the ill-fated Franklin expedition sailed in 1845, this year is blocked by thick sea ice. Renewables ain't renewable and they certainly don't make electricity cheaper. And if you are worried about sea level rise, I suggest that you get some old photos of Fort Denison, get the tide gauge data and go and have a look for yourself. Don't take my word. I encourage all students in my electorate to study the science and learn for themselves. Josh Frydenberg's throat appears to be on the side of good and has decided the treasurer has done TOO MUCH YELLING given the coughs and voice cracks in this lickspittle. Sussan Ley made a comment about some people confusing state and federal environmental laws when it came to developments, in response to a question Rebehka Sharkie asked. Sharkie's eyebrows went so high, you might find them somewhere on Kosciuszko. Richard Marles to Josh Frydenberg: Will the treasurer admit that the government's decision to underfund the national disability insurance scheme is preventing Australians with a disability from getting the care they need? Why has the government propped up its budget by deliberately under spending $4.6bn on the national disability insurance scheme? Frydenberg: I can confirm that there are 11,000 people helping to deliver the NDIS, and in the last year 115,000 Australians came on to the NDIS, Mr Speaker. There are now 300,000 Australians on the NDIS, and as the acting prime minister said, more than 100,000 of them are getting support for the first time. The reality is, the NDIS has increased tenfold in the three years of transition, Mr Speaker. Everyone who has been approved in the program is getting support under a fully funded NDIS. Mr Speaker, in 2018/19 we doubled the funding and the spending on the NDIS to $8.5bn from the $4bn a year prior. Mr Speaker, the Labor party knows all too well but only the Coalition can deliver budget surpluses. Only the Coalition can fund services like the NDIS, that Australians need and deserve. Josh Frydenberg gets the next lickspittle but I didn't hit the down volume button in time and my eardrums are blown out and now there is blood on my keyboard. Now Richard Marles does it: I refer to the minister's previous answer about demand in the NDIS. If the government seriously suggesting that Australians with a disability aren't out there waiting for care packages? And if the government seriously suggesting that the NDIS can adequately meet demand with a $4.6bn dollar underspend? Michael McCormack: Funding for the NDIS is guaranteed Mr Speaker. No Australian who is eligible for the NDIS will miss out. No Australian will miss out....We are strongly committed to the NDIS. As I said, as the minister said in the first question and Question Time today, it is want of the most important social and economic reforms in our country 's history. I'm proud to say that when this reform was suggested by Prime Minister Gillard who is in the house today, I saw her this morning and commended her for the work she doing with Beyond Blue and other organisations in her post political career. She has been a class act, I have to say and this was good reform Mr Speaker. I was proud to say that I was the first New South Wales federal parliamentarian to sign up to the everyone counts campaign which happened at the time the NDIS was first mooted. The vast majority of the more than 300,000 participants, it is delivering improved levels of support, more choice and control. Over 100,000 people are receiving disability support services for the first time ever. It is good policy reform, Mr Speaker but I have to say, I have to say that when those introduced this legislation, they did not put the amount of money towards the NDIS that was required. We are finding the reform, we are backing the NDIS and again, Mr Speaker, I say funding for the NDIS is guaranteed. Terri Butler gets kicked out of question time. Lucky her. George Christensen is the first one to inflict Michael McCormack on us and I'd love to tell you what it was about but I was groaning under the desk too loudly to hear. OK. Let's do this. Sigh. Jim Chalmers to Stuart Robert: What is the value of the underspend on the NDIS in the final budget outcome? Robert:...As he knows today in the final budget update, the actual number for the NDIS was a spend of$8.5bn. The great thing to remember about the NDIS, if we look at actual cost per participant, in the 18/19 budget, it was estimated and expenditure $46,400 participant. The... actual spend was $46,800. Therefore a $400 increase. Not a single person has seen a decrease. The underspend figure of $4.6bn can be explained as follows. When the bilateral estimate will put together, they said it would be 3,172 Australians. The bilateral estimate had 30,200 expected citizens but once the data derived from the states and territories, only want hundred and 99,000 citizens could be found. They are not able to be found from the state and territories or not able to be double counted frankly, the data is wrong when hundred thousand. However, on top of that, the bilateral estimate said that 69,195 new participants would come through. In actuality, when hundred and 117,000 new participants have sought access. A 109% increase in new participants have come through. How is it that we have been able to find this demand driven scheme and uncapped, demand driven scheme. Anywhere we been able to find it, not last year, not this year, but every year going forward. $17.8bn this year growing to $25bn in 22, 23. The only reason we can find going forward is because we, this government, led by this treasurer has actually balanced the budget. Today's announcement was about balancing the budget. The first time in a long time, 11 years! Precipitated by those opposite, the budget is balanced this year and next year and the following years going forward. This government will not be lectured by those opposite when it comes to fiscal discipline and how we fund services. No, wait, Michael McCormack is sitting in the prime minister's chair and I am back to looking at that off-planet lifestyle. OK. Julie Owens just did a whole statement in Auslan and maybe parts of the planet are OK. Oh FFS. Craig Kelly obviously saw Malcolm Roberts' contribution on the dolphin debate and decided his crown was under threat, because he just made a CLIMATE CHANGE ISN'T REAL speech in a 90 second statement and I don't want to live on this planet any more. I really don't know who let the stupid out today, but this was Malcolm Roberts' contribution to a Greens motion to have dolphins banned from performing in captivity. This is an actual thing that an actual senator said in our actual parliament. Malcolm Roberts: This is yet another example of the arrogance of the Greens to presume that they know what dolphins are thinking and feeling. We have a horse. Our daughter has a wonderful horse named Clancy. Clancy is a horse, so he behaves in accordance with being a herd animal. People who take a horse out of a herd usually have a companion animal. We chose not to. Clancy is now on our acreage at home. He loves being with humans. He does not like being with horses. The point of the matter is that we don't know what animals think. Secondly, dolphins like humans. That's a fact. That's well known. Dolphins are attracted to humans. These kinds of practices actually fund research into dolphins, and these kinds of businesses support the curing of dolphins recovering from being hit by boats. This is yet another example of the Greens pretending that they know everything. If there is extraterrestrial intelligent life out there, we know why they are not making contact. It is almost question time. I feel smallpox coming on. Pat Dodson has released a statement: Patrick Dodson, Labor Senator for Western Australia, has expressed concern about the shooting by Western Australian Police of an Aboriginal woman in Geraldton on Tuesday evening. "I acknowledge that the Police have committed to conducting a thorough inquiry into this tragic death, with oversight apparently by the Corruption and Crime Commission. "Without wanting to prejudice that inquiry, I can only echo the question being posed by many in the community: why was it necessary to resort to the lethal force of a firearm to resolve whatever trouble the Police were confronting on Tuesday evening? "I extend my deepest sympathies to the family of the dead woman. "The Aboriginal community of Geraldton deserve a full account of what happened. Any inquiry, including the Coroner's inquiry, will take a long time to report and community concerns need to be settled as soon as possible. "In the meantime, I urge the Aboriginal people of Geraldton to stay calm in these difficult times and not to engage in any provocative or retaliatory behaviour." What is Jim Chalmers' idea of a "responsible surplus"? There are at least half a dozen things the government should be contemplating. Well, they can pick up any of these six ideas we've proposed, and they can cost them and they can be done responsibly and affordably. They can bring forward part of their stage two tax cuts. They can fund a responsible increase in Newstart. They can bring some infrastructure spending. They can have a business incentive investment, a wages policy, and energy policy - and in the absence of an energy policy has been a handbrake on growth in the economy for too long. There are so many things the government should be considering. Instead they give press conferences, patting themselves on the back to shortchanging Australians with a disability, and they pretend everything's hunky-dory in the economy. Walk down a main street in Australia, either side. Ask the workers and managers how they are going. I think when you get the answers to that and what the government wants to pretend about the economy, you can see why so many people will conclude that the government, when it comes to the economy, is hopelessly out of touch. Bill Shorten had a few choice words about the NDIS underspend in the budget: The NDIS is constipated. The money's meant to be there getting out to the people. Mr Morrison struts in parliament and says, listen, it's a demand-driven program and the reason why we've been able to pocket $3.6bn is because the demand isn't there. That's just a lie. The reality is the demand is there. Go to speak with people in the communities and those watching and reading news today, they will be furious. The reality is, in the last 10 weeks I've travelled across Australia, it's been jaw dropping to realise people are waiting 12 months, two years for a wheelchair, but at the same time the government says no problems here, we will pocket the money. The problem is the NDIS hasn't had a CEO for 120 days and Minister Roberts had legislation in the House and he was too busy to back in his own legislation. This government is disinterested. The NDIS is adrift. It's doing good things but there's too many people missing out and now we know where the money is. Josh Frydenberg is giving himself a pat on the back with Mathias Cormann. They have the money and people with the disabilities are asking they have the money, why can't we get some? We are all slowly going through the budget outcome statement, but one thing which has been pointed out to me, is that with spending down, GST is also down. That is not a problem for the feds, because the corporate tax intake has increased. But as we all know, the states don't get corporate tax. Which, for budgets like Tasmania, is going to be pretty diabolical. The Tasmanian Liberal government included a couple of lines about their exposure to GST changes in the 2018-19 budget: More immediately, the risks to Tasmania's GST revenue estimates are linked directly to the state's share of the national population; the size of the GST revenue pool; and Tasmania's relativity factor which is currently forecast to fall over the forward estimates. GST revenue collections are highly sensitive to changes in national consumer spending patterns, as has been evidenced by a recent increase in the national pool forecasts in the Australian government's 2018-19 budget. There is a one-to-one relationship between variations in the size of the national pool of GST available for distribution to the states and variations in GST revenue to Tasmania. For example, a 1% variation in the GST pool would result in a $24.3m variation in Tasmania's GST revenue in 2018-19, assuming that the state's population share and assessed relativity remained constant. With GST down by 3.4%, which is just over $2bn, then Tasmania is looking at losing just over $80m (calculation mistakes are mine). Given the fight Tasmania just had to have its federal housing debt wiped, with that saved money now tied to new housing projects and nothing else, this is not good news for Tasmania. And it won't be for the states as a whole. The Australian Council of Social Services has also responded to the final budget outcome statement released today. It says there is no excuse now not to increase Newstart: As Acoss warned, tax cuts don't seem to be having the promised effect and now is not the time to bring forward tax cuts slated for 2022. The most effective measure for the economy now is to increase Newstart. With the budget in balance, the government is running out of excuses for not boosting the incomes of people who need the greatest relief. The government should prepare now to announce a major boost for people on the lowest incomes and a substantial social housing infrastructure package in the budget statement at the end of the year, because the tax cuts are not delivering the boost we need," Acoss CEO Cassandra Goldie sad today. The Australian Industry Group has responded to Christian Porter's proposed IR reforms - calling for the length of enterprise agreements to be uncapped for all pay deals, not just new work sites, and opposing increased penalties for wage theft. AiG chief executive Innes Willox: Enterprise agreements that cover work on major projects should be able to continue for the life of the project even if this is longer than the current four-year limit. This reform should not be limited to greenfields agreements. Regular enterprise agreements commonly regulate work on major projects; not just greenfields agreements. The second discussion paper on Strengthening Penalties for Non-compliance needs very careful consideration. Deliberate underpayment of wages is of course unacceptable, and strong laws are already in place to deter and punish this unlawful conduct. The civil penalties for breaching awards and pay record-keeping requirements were increased by up to 20 times in 2017, and a well-resourced regulator (the fair work ombudsman) is in place to enforce the laws. The current hefty civil penalties are appropriate. Exposing employers to criminal penalties, including imprisonment, for underpayments would risk discouraging investment and employment. As expected, the Senate supported Rex Patrick's call for a referral of John Setka to the privileges committee (which decides if someone has attempted to intimidate a member, among its many duties) over comments he made about Rex Patrick and Jacqui Lambie. The AFP is also investigating whether there was a threat. Setka denies any attempt at intimidation or threatening behaviour and said it was "campaigning" The CFMEU have responded with a statement: We welcome the opportunity to appear before the Senate standing committee of privileges. Australian construction unions have run targeted political campaigns in support of workers safety and conditions for more than 100 years. When politicians contemplate supporting draconian industrial relations laws that will threaten workers' rights our members expect us to stand up and campaign against them. The suggestion that campaigning against legislation which undermines the human rights of workers and their representatives is in any way in contempt of the Senate is anti-democratic and sets a dangerous precedent. The use of illegally obtained recordings of a private meeting against CFMEU officials also raises serious ethical questions. We look forward to attending the privileges committee and will happily answer any questions from senators. At least someone is having fun today Jim Chalmers and Katy Gallagher have issued their official response to the 2018-19 final budget outcome statement: The defining feature of the 2018-19 final budget outcome is a $4.6bn underspend in the national disability insurance scheme. These new numbers show the Morrison government is propping up their budget by denying Australians with a disability the care they need, deserve and were promised. Even with a $4.6bn underspend on the NDIS, higher iron ore prices and a lower dollar boosting profits and the bottom line, the budget is still in deficit. This is the sixth consecutive budget deficit from a Liberal government which promised surpluses in the first year and every year after that. Today's result confirms that net debt has more than doubled under the Liberals from $175bn in 2013 to $374bn now. The government shouldn't be patting themselves on the back about today's numbers. Australia has the slowest growth in a decade, stagnant wages, productivity in decline, record household debt, high underemployment, and declining living standards. Right when the Australian economy needs action to get the economy moving again, the Liberals have a political strategy but not an economic policy. Shortchanging Australians with a disability is not an economic policy. It is time Josh Frydenberg and Scott Morrison brought forward a budget update to update their forecasts and properly outline an economic plan that supports the floundering economy and better safeguards it from global risks." They'll be saying the same things in different ways at their presser at 1pm. Julia Gillard is delivering her state of the nation address, speaking about the impact mental health can have on the workforce. It's seasonally adjusted, but but worth noting because the consensus was it would stay stable at 5.2% and instead has increased slightly, to 5.3%. From Australian Associated Press: The jobless rate edged higher to a seasonally adjusted 5.3% in August, bolstering the case for another Reserve Bank rate cut as soon as October. A surge in people with part-time work boosted net employment by 34,700 to 12.93 million during the month, but underemployment ticked higher on a 15,500 decrease in people with full-time work. Most economists had expected the unemployment rate to remain unchanged at 5.2% for a fifth consecutive month, despite dual rate cuts by the Reserve Bank and federal government tax stimulus supposedly initiated to counter jobs market slack, low wages growth and low household consumption levels. Unemployment was the key metric cited by the RBA in its decision to cut rates in both June and July to a record low 1.0% with a third cut to 0.75% already completely priced in for November. Matt Canavan has just put the answers up: 1. As at 31 July 2019, the NAIF Board has committed $1.4bn through 11 investment decisions and two conditional approvals. The NAIF dollar value of the 11 investment decisions is $1.2bn. 2. As at 31 July 2019, a total of $38,522,982.40 had been drawn across three projects. Access to NAIF loan money through drawdowns is dependent on the proponent requirements and timing of construction and project activities. Loan money is not drawn in one large sum. 3. Projects have access to a draw down facility when they reach financial close. As at 31 July 2019, the three projects that had reached financial close were: Onslow Marine Supply Base, Voyages Indigenous Tourism Australia and Humpty Doo Barramundi. 4. As at 31 July 2019, the amount drawn down for each of the three projects referred to in question 3 was: Onslow Marine Supply Base - $13,436,538; Voyages Indigenous Tourism Limited - $23,732,693.30; Humpty Doo Barramundi - $1,353,751.10. 5. As at 31 July 2019, there was 87 active activities in the NAIF pipeline, classified as follows: 48 active enquiries (NAIF has received an initial enquiry from the proponent and requested the proponent provide high level project information); one at the strategic assessment stage; 28 at the due diligence stage; seven at the investment decision and execution stage; three having reached financial close. 6. Refer to question 5. 7. Refer to question 5. 8. Refer to question 5. The Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund is something I know gets forgotten a bit, but I keep an eye on, because it is really, really important to people in regional Queensland and the Northern Territory. It was meant to turn northern Australia into, in Tony Abbott's words, "an economic powerhouse". It has not done that. Mostly because it is taking so long to get major projects off the ground. Queensland senator Murray Watt had some questions on the fund recently, which were put on notice. 1. What is the total value of the NAIF's investment decisions to date. 2. In aggregate, how much of that funding has been released via the draw down facility. 3. What projects have access to a draw down facility. 4. How much has each of those projects drawn down. 5. How many projects are currently in the enquiry and preliminary assessment stage. 6. How many projects are currently in the strategic assessment stage. 7. How many projects are currently in the due diligence stage. 8. How many projects are in the investment decision and execution stage. In the question and answer session, Christian Porter praised the Shop Distributing and Allied Employees Association (SDA) as an example of a union that is "very constructive" in the enterprise bargaining process and "sensible". "I was speaking with McDonald's the other day - and they were describing how they encourage issues or information about practices a worker thinks can be improved direct to the management and they deal with them swiftly and quickly and they have a great cooperative relationship with the SDA where the SDA also passes that information on." The SDA is a controversial example because at major employers including McDonald's, Coles and Woolworths, the union agreed to enterprise agreements that traded off the penalty rates of casual staff, allowing the employers to lawfully pay millions less than otherwise required by the award. When Labor wanted to ban the Fair Work Commission from penalty rates, Coalition figures including MP George Christensen and the Council of Small Business Organisations of Australia were extremely critical of the SDA for cutting penalty rates and allowing big employers a big advantage over smaller competitors. Asked at the doorstop how he could call for upward pressure on wages while praising the SDA, Porter said the SDA "seems generally speaking to work very well with the large employers in that sector" and disputed that they had left workers worse off. "I'm not sure the SDA would agree with your assessment of the overall result of their engagement with employer associations in that sector." Porter said he meant the SDA is more constructive about disputes than the construction union, which he said faked safety concerns. Christian Porter has just spoken to the Committee for the Economic Development of Australia state of the nation conference, dropping lots of hints about IR reforms. The industrial relations minister said that he's first looking for improvements "of the most importance to strengthening the Australian economy" and secondly they must be "actually possible" in that they "can achieve a significant enough degree of consensus that they can be supported through parliament". He repeated the framework articulated by Scott Morrison that reforms need to: Create jobs and put upward pressure on wages to benefit workers Help business by boosting productivity; and Help the economy grow overall Because the ghost of WorkChoices looms over all IR discussion, Porter argued that it was "mistaken" and a "false view" the system is a perpetual contest between employers and employees. Porter hopes he can end the "revolving door" of IR reform by finding reforms that are mutually beneficial. Porter praised Julia Gillard's Fair Work Act as a "far from terrible" starting point, praising Australia's system of independent minimum wage setting which has produced the highest minimum wage in the world. The Australian Council of Trade Union's Change the Rules campaign - by contrast - was made up of "foreign and radical policy prescriptions" such as taxpayer subsidies of wages in the childcare sector. No word on when Jim Chalmers is going to respond to the budget statement as yet, but he is tweeting: For some reason Mark Coulton just introduced an NDIS bill into the House - not Stuart Robert, the actual minister. Which is a bit weird. It's Robert's job. Christian Porter who has a pretty insane workload, seems to make it into the chamber to introduce his bills. There was no traditional departure shot, but nothing stops Mike Bowers Let's be clear here. The same person who believes abortions lead to increased breast cancer rates despite no evidence; who said the assault on Tony Abbott during the marriage equality debate was "[This] is just a bit of a foretaste of what will come should the yes campaigners feel even more empowered in the event that they were successful with the vote... This is just a bit of a harbinger of what is likely to occur"; that the marriage equality debate wasn't necessary because a lot of gay people didn't want to marry - pointing to Italian designers Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana as proof, and goodness knows what else, is comparing an academic website to Hitler, because it is following its academic duty and refusing to humour climate change deniers. Climate. Change. Is. Happening. No one can be "climate change agnostic". The climate is literally changing. Around us. Siberia was on fire. The ice is melting. Oceans are getting warmer and rising. And Australia is in the grips of a drought that in some areas, has been going on for almost 10 years. WITH NO RAIN TO COME. Communities are running out of water. It is literally National party policy to pray for rain. There is no room and no time to humour climate change deniers. No room. To compare that to Hitler and Stalin is absolute bullshit propaganda and deserves all of the scorn. All of it. Especially since actual Nazis are once again running around in the sunlight. ACTUAL Nazis. Eric Abetz continued, because of course he did: As an agnostic in the climate change debate, I accept that there are scientists of good faith on all sides. I'm willing to listen, to try to discern and determine where the facts actually lie. To so superciliously and arrogantly deny a voice to an alternative point of view is reminiscent of totalitarian regimes. The orthodoxy, it seems, shall prevail not through rational debate, scientific endeavour and reasoning, but by crushing, shunning and banning any opposing views. But it is through challenging, questioning, probing, asking and debating that we learn, discover and innovate. Inquiring minds look beyond orthodoxies, independently assessing issues. It's what has got us to where we are today. We can learn more, will learn more and, indeed, need to learn more, but only if we don't stifle the inquiring mind. For well over half a century we've been subjected to environmental prophets of doom who've proven to be false. Prophecies have told us the USA would be on food rations and water rations by 1980. We've been told the Brisbane River wouldn't flood again. Since that prophecy, it's happened not once, but twice. We've been told the Murray River wouldn't flow out to sea again. Since that prophecy, it has. And the list goes on, including the death, senator Dean Smith, of the city of Perth. Well, last time I looked I think it still existed! So please forgive our fellow Australians who are willing to ask the questions. When the United Nations have, for more than 30 years, predicted we only have 10 years left to fix climate change, we're entitled to ask why their predictions have been wrong. Given the undisputed legacy of unfulfilled predictions, people are entitled to question and to put an alternative viewpoint. This ugly, unscientific, totalitarian, arrogant approach taken by the Conversation is the exact opposite to the principles of scientific endeavour. The lesson of history is the truth will out and the inquiring mind will ultimately prevail. The Conversation can stop the conversation, but it cannot stop the march of inquiring minds that will ultimately determine this issue. The taxpayers, who indirectly fund this publication, deserve so much better. The Conversation needs to live up to its name. You might have seen the Eric Abetz story. A search of "Hitler" in the Senate Hansard shows the whole speech: Tonight I call on the publication which calls itself the Conversation to live up to its name. Yesterday, its daily newsletter arrogantly determined to stop conversation. The lack of self-awareness is as cringeworthy as it is acute. The Conversation stopping conversation on the topic of - you've guessed it! - climate change is to deny its banner and its very reason for existence. Why, you may ask, would the Conversation deny its own name? The answer, colleagues, is in the heading of the newsletter, 'Climate change deniers are dangerous - they don't deserve a place on our site'. Allow me to give you a few quotes: once upon a time, we might have viewed climate sceptics as merely frustrating ... it's 2019, and ... we know better. That's why ... a zero-tolerance approach to moderating climate change deniers, and sceptics. Not only will we be removing their comments, we'll be locking their account ...... As a reader, author or commenter, we need your help. If you see something that is misinformation, please don't engage, simply report it ... Dob them in and help us create a space where they don't derail the conversation. Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin and Mao Zedong couldn't have put it better themselves. They'd be so proud! Question: One of the things you guys like to talk about a lot is how you pay down Labor's debt. Since 2012/13 it's gone from 10% of GDP to 20% of GDP and interest payments of $15bn. Why has it increased so much and isn't it the case you're not paying it down? Mathias Cormann: We introduced a forward trajectory not just in deep deficit but deteriorating. We have turned that around and we are in balance and you only pay down debt when you are in balance. Having said that, the borrowing requirements in net debt terms have reduced in the 18/19 financial year and the reason why there's an uptick in net debt is because of the valuation in relation to the government securities, and that's essentially an adjustment that is not based on borrowing needs, it is based on what's happening with the valuation of government securities. Question: We have a lift in corporate taxation, a strong lift in PAYG, but household spending through GST is $4bn lower than what you projected a year ago. Do you reconcile the fact you have more people in work but they are spending far less? Josh Frydenberg: Obviously we want household consumption to be higher, Shane, and as you know household consumption is 60% of GDP. One of the ways we can drive that is through the tax relief that is being legislated through the parliament. The last two budgets, more than $300bn. You have heard from the Reserve Bank governor, while some people are paying down the debt without tax relief that is slowing their way, others are spending it in the economy, and it will boost disposable income. Obviously, we want to see household consumption higher but we are pleased the housing market has stabilised, in terms of the clearance rate, which are now significantly higher than they were this time last year. Prices in the key markets of Sydney and Melbourne have lifted, and the benefit of the 50 basis point rate cut was not fully seen in the June quarter, and obviously we will be seeing more in the September quarter, so too with the tax cuts, and of course the infrastructure spending. We are taking action to lift household consumption but there is also uncertainty out there, and I don't think anyone wants to overlook that fact. There is uncertainty in the global economic outlook and that impact on investment decisions here at home. Question: Despite the final budget outcome, you are 1.9% down from 3% forecast. Business investment down, household investment down, and individual tax revenue down. Doesn't that disprove your assertion that... Josh Frydenberg: What we have announced is that nominal GDP is above what was forecast, and the Australian economy continues to grow. As the prime minister, the finance minister and I have said, looking internationally, big economies like Germany, the UK, Sweden, Singapore, Hong Kong and others, they experienced negative growth, and unemployment is now at 5.2%. We will get some labour force numbers today so we will see what happens there, but unemployment was 5.7% when we came to government, it is now 5.2%, and the real strength of the economy has come from that strong labour market, which the RBA governor has actually talked about himself. Question: Just on the NDIS underspend - $4.6bn, turning out to consolidated revenue, shouldn't that go into disability services in some way? Mathias Cormann: Ultimately, 100% of the demand in the community will be met. Across the budget, across all of the demand driven programs, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, hospitals, aged care, the NDIS, whether it is a pension - the government will cover the cost of the demand that is there to its fullest extent. It makes absolutely no sense to put money aside when the money will be there. Essentially, in any budget, at any budget update you have movements up and down. You have demand that is higher than expected and you have to pay more. Sometimes you have demand lower-than-expected. The situation with the NDIS is unique, because we are going for a massive transition. We are going through a transition from estate-based funding arrangement, where there was a lot of unmet demand and a lot of inadequate support for Australians with a disability, to a situation where every Australian ultimately who has a demand for visibility services, will receive that support tailored to their needs. From Josh Frydenberg's office: These outcomes demonstrate that the government's economic plan is working and confirm that the budget will be back in the black and back on track for the 2019-20 year. Importantly Australia has completed its 28th consecutive year of economic growth and maintained its AAA credit rating. With more than 1.4 million jobs having been created since the Coalition Government was first elected in 2013, today's outcome reflects the record number of people in jobs and an economy which is benefiting from the free trade agreements (FTAs) negotiated by the Coalition over the last six years. Our FTAs combined with strong prices for our key commodities exports has seen the current account move into surplus for the first time since 1975. Nominal GDP grew by 5.3% in 2018-19, which was significantly stronger than the 2018-19 Budget forecast of 3 ¾ per cent. This was the result of stronger than-expected employment growth and higher-than-assumed prices for key commodities. The final budget outcome for 2018-19 further demonstrates that the government's economic plan is working to create more jobs, and to ensure Australia can continue to afford the essential services Australians rely on. In the year ahead the economy will continue to be supported by the government's economic plan as outlined in the 2019-20 budget, including the largest tax cuts in two decades, and our $100 billion pipeline of infrastructure investment. The final budget outcome 2018-19 can be found at            www.budget.gov.au. Josh Frydenberg (who is not yelling and for that we are all grateful) The Australian economy is strong and ready for the challenges ahead. As a result of the Morrison government's economic plan and responsible economic management, the underlying cash balance in the final budget outcome for the 19/20 year is $13.8bn better than estimated at the time of the 2018/19 budget. The deficit of $690m represents 0.7% of gross domestic product. A growing economy with more jobs and stronger terms of trade than anticipated at the time of the 2018/19 budget has driven total receipts $11.5bn higher, with payments $6.6bn lower than expected at the time of the 2018/19 budget. Employment growth far exceeded expectations at the time of delivering the 2018/19 budget in May 2018. With about 300,000 additional jobs created in 2018/19, employment grew by 2.6%, well above the 1.5% growth forecast in the 2018/19 budget. More than nine out of 10 jobs created in the last year were in full-time employment, with the proportion of those of working age in welfare now at its lowest level in 30 years. More jobs drives increases in revenue, as well as lower payments with individual tax receipts $5.7bn compared to the 2018/19 budget forecast. Our strong fiscal management has put the budget on a sustainable trajectory, ensuring that we can guarantee the essential services that Australians need and deserve. The 2018/19 final budget outcome shows that we've kept spending as a share of GDP at 24.6%, below the long-run average of 24.7%, for the second consecutive year, while also providing record levels of investment in essential services, like hospitals, schools and aged. It is like economics Christmas today. Job figures and budget outcomes. The government will get to point that it is well on track to delivering its operating surplus in the next financial year. But the markets are still very cautious, with commentators expecting the ongoing slow employment growth (despite jobs being added to the economy, the jobless rate has not shifted and that is not expected to change today) will mean the RBA will once again cut rates - if not in October, than November. The government has been helped a lot by iron ore prices going through the roof. But that can't last forever. Linda Burney: This prime minister is obsessed with urine tests, saliva swabs and cashless cards - and young Australians and their families are right to ask themselves:  Where is the evidence to support these policies?  How will this help me find a job?  How will this help me pay the bills?  How will this make things easier to raise and build a good and healthy life for my family?  Why isn't this government doing anything to stimulate a weak economy and that is only getting weaker?  What is the point of the Morrison government? This prime minister and this Liberal National government - and their refusal to stimulate the economy - is creating an economic environment that is making it so difficult for young Australians to raise and build a life for their families. Of course Labor supports the bill, but there is much more that needs to be done. Which is why Labor has moved a second reading amendment calling for the government to (a) Guarantee it will not make any cuts to Paid Parental Leave; (b) Increase paid family violence leave [and Labor wants to see two weeks paid family violence leave]; and (c) Work with business to close the gender pay gap. The government has absolutely no reason not to support this amendment - and I commend it to the House. Linda Burney is attempting to move an amendment to the paid parental leave amendment bill (yes, I know): The prime minister is more obsessed with devising new ways to humiliate, harass and prod younger Australians who are simply trying to enter the workforce and build a life for their families. Last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to pursue its ideologically driven, ineffective, indiscriminate and very expensive cashless card - which will make it more difficult for young people trying to re-enter the workforce to purchase essential items and basics at affordable prices. Last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to force young people trying to enter the workforce eat more into their savings before they can access income support. And last week, this out-of-touch government introduced legislation to make it more difficult for single parents to access the Education Entry Supplement to undertake further study. Don't think anyone has forgotten that the government has allowed Pauline Hanson legitimacy to attack domestic violence victims (saying she believes women are making up claims to win custody battles is happening on a large enough scale that the whole court needs a revamp is just outrageous) by making her deputy chair of its family court inquiry. I just caught the tail end of Linda Burney's speech to the chamber: "It is up to the government to explain how it can possibly support an inquiry whose deputy chair doesn't even acknowledge the prevalence and gendered nature of family violence." Yup. Both Josh Frydenberg and Mathias Cormann will be speaking on the final budget statement press conference. It is in the Blue Room, so you know it is a two-flag affair. MINIMUM. Richard Marles had some advice for Scott Morrison: It is very much in Australia's interests that America is an outward-looking trading nation and what it's about is seeking to build an open global trading economy. Obviously when there are trade tensions between America and China that is not good for the global economy actually, but it's certainly not good for the Australian economy and it's really important that Scott Morrison is making that case to president Trump. And you know, I get that he'll be enjoying being there with his mate and he'll like all the happy snaps and that's all fine. But at the end of the day the prime minister is going to be judged on what outcomes he achieves and what he brings back. Christian Porter has released a discussion paper on industrial relations. Paul Karp wrote about it here: This is the official line from his office: Attorney-general and minister for industrial relations, Christian Porter, said the vast majority of employers try to do the right thing by their workers, but a strong deterrent was needed for the minority who deliberately exploit their staff. As well as criminal sanctions, the discussion paper examines a range of issues associated with underpayments, including civil penalties, sham contracting and the question of liability for employers where entities in their supply network flout employment laws. A separate discussion paper was released today, examining the issue of Project Life Greenfields Agreements. Under the Fair Work Act, enterprise agreements can only apply for a maximum of four years after approval. While the majority of new projects are finalised within that timeframe, larger projects can take longer and require cost certainty to enable them to be completed on time and on budget. The question the government is now seeking feedback on is whether agreements could be extended to cover the full-life of a project, instead of the current four-year maximum term. The government is also asking what additional safeguards could be built into those agreements to ensure workers are not disadvantaged as the result of any changes. The papers can be viewed at:            https://www.ag.gov.au/Consultations/Pages/industrial-relations-consultation.aspx The bells are ringing, and truly, they are the only sign of life in this place today. It is flat. Very, very flat. Oh goodie. It's 'government seeking increased powers to deal with terrorists' time. Peter Dutton wants more powers to strip terrorist suspects of their citizenship. The current laws aren't exactly getting a thumbs up from our security agencies, but hey. Sure. Here is what the national security monitor had to say about the current laws and here is what Asio had to say. Totally normal It is also the Ceda State of the Nation forum today (and tomorrow), where speakers, including Julia Gillard, will deliver addresses on how Australia is going on a global scale. It's being held at Parliament House, so if you want to follow along, you can here. The ball started quite late last night, because there were a couple of last-minute divisions. Which means we had shots like this: One of the reasons was the "strengthening the character test" migration bill amendments (gotta love that 1984 language!) which Labor is opposing. Basically, just being convicted of a low-level crime, even if there is no sentence imposed, is enough to deny you a visa, or have you kicked out. Our New Zealand neighbours are quite upset about it, given the rash of deportations of people who may have been born in NZ but never lived there, which is happening already. Andrew Giles had a bit to say about it: At a time when so many electors are so disenchanted with our politics we don't need unnecessary conflict in this place, which this bill, as presented, is. The government should have made a compelling case for expanding powers further. They should have set out a rationale, but they have failed to do so. They have failed to even try. This has been all about the politics and not about the policy, and this has been demonstrated in the summary way in which the minister responded to the concerns and proposals put forward by the Labor party to try to find a way through. There is no disagreement of principle here when it comes to the important role of the character test and the broad discretionary powers which are necessary to go with it. These are things that we support now, as we did in 2014. But what we have here is a failure by the government to have regard to the consequences of its actions and a failure of the government to look to the national interest in progressing significant legislation impacting on people's lives. To give credit where it is due, Michael McCormack did hunt me down last night to say he had heard I was coming down with smallpox (my reaction yesterday to remembering he would be acting prime minister on a sitting day, and therefore question time) and he hoped I felt better. Not a lot of politicians would try and have a laugh with the journalist who refers to them by a variety of bland foods, so snaps for that. But still. Question time is going to be excruciating. Mike Bowers was there to catch the arrivals: The Midwinter Ball was held overnight, and in good news: Which is a good outcome. The speeches were officially on the record for the first time (although given you know Malcolm Turnbull once did a Donald Trump impersonation and Paul Keating's Placido Domingo speech, you could say they were never really off the record). You didn't miss much. Sharri Markson and David Speers jointly won press gallery journalist of the year. Daryl Braithwaite was the entertainment. I assume Horses was performed on repeat (I left after the speeches). Speaking of the speeches, both Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese made jokes about the 1997 Engadine McDonalds rumour (google it, if you don't get the reference). Morrison: I note the great collective that runs the gallery has, in its infinite wisdoms, as I said, decided to put tonight's speech officially on the record. Sure, your call. But now you won't get here my views on RBA policy, the South China Sea, John Hewson... What's currently in the Coalition agreement. What I think about the contents of Nikki Savva's book, I reckon she knows, or, most importantly, what really happened at the Engadine McDonald's in 1997! It will remain the mystery of the ages. Happy Acting Prime Minister Michael McCormack Day! I was up all night I was so excited. It's all because Scott Morrison is on his way to the United States, where he will be the guest of honour at only the second State Dinner Donald Trump has thrown. As he flies off, Josh Frydenberg will hand down the final budget statement, which is the how-did-those-treasury-predictions-actually-pan-out statement. He is pretty excited by it, so I think those iron ore prices have given a better-than-expected bump at just the right time for the economy. But that means it is also a big day for Jim Chalmers. And there is also the unemployment figures due today. But all in all, it should be pretty low ebb. It's parliament Friday, and everyone is a bit sick of each other by this time in the sitting cycle, and keen to get back to their homes. Katharine Murphy is travelling with the PM, but you have Sarah Martin and Paul Karp and what is left of me at this point of the sitting. It's not a lot, but it is yours. Mike Bowers, who didn't finish work until close to midnight because of the midwinter ball, is also out and about. I'll bring you some of that very soon. I really need another coffee. And an egg sandwich. While I look for those, let's get into it. 61820 false false  Amy Remeikis       Liberal backbench MP Craig Kelly has urged school students not to strike over climate change on Friday, telling question time on Thursday: 'There is no 97% consensus. Such claims are a fraud.'         You just KNOW he's waited his whole life for this moment.        Yup.        Sames tho.        Mood of the nation.        Another meeting which could have been an email.        When the main show is in the sidelines.        Christian Porter during a late division in the House of Representatives before the Midwinter Ball.        Trent Zimmerman during a late division.        Deputy PM Michael McCormack and Catherine Shaw.        Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong arrive for the Midwinter Ball.        Scott and Jenny Morrison.        Josh and Aimee Frydenberg and Ed Husic (left).        Zali Steggall and Tim Irvine.        Anne Aly and David Allen.     

Load-Date: September 19, 2019


End of Document




Now that climate change is irrefutable, denialists like Andrew Bolt insist it will be good for us; Even as the fires roar at the gates of power, the Murdoch columnist and others argue climate change is 'overall, a good thing'
The Guardian(London)
January 30, 2020 Thursday 5:03 AM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:1
Length: 950 words
Byline: Van Badham
Body


There was a battered paper cartoon pasted to our office cupboard, sometime back in the year 2000. It depicted a landscape of power plants belching smoke, in the foreground of which was a billboard where an enthusiastic woman in a sunhat sipped a margarita through a straw. A speech bubble came from the woman's lipsticked mouth: "Global warming?" she gushed. "I can't wait!"
It was supposed to be a joke.
Memory of that cartoon provoked an old, nihilistic laugh to echo in my throat at a confluence of climate events this week, 20 careless years later. Dear world, three months after they began, the Australian fires are not out. Today, ash is raining in our nation's capital, orange flames stare over the mountains behind Canberra.            Scientific consensus, affirmed by Australia's exhausted            fire chiefs, is that the fires are effects of the anthropogenic climate crisis. And yet even as the fires roar at the physical gates of power, on Sunday the conservative columnist Andrew Bolt, of the Murdoch press, published an insistence that climate change is "overall, a good thing". The only thing missing from this new cartoon is the lipstick.
Bolt's claim actually represents some intellectual evolution on the issue. It wasn't so long ago that global scientific consensus on the reality of climate change amounted to naught but an "end-of-the-world religion" to him. He's hardly the only conservative megaphone that's been braying to disrupt meaningful political action on climate change these last, wasted, crucial decades. He is, however, a useful local avatar to illustrate the history of both the denialist campaign, and how encroaching reality is obliging the adaptation of its messaging.
It was as far back as 1896 when scientists first warned about the climatic impact of fossil fuel emissions. In 1956,            the New York Times advanced the same concerns; an article appeared with the headline "Warmer Climate on the Earth Could Be Due to Increasing Carbon Dioxide in the Air". Although these warnings were ignored, fossil fuel corporations such as Shell and Exxon sat quietly on studies that confirmed their            key assumptions. Finally, research from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 1988 informed a fateful, public conclusion that a "greenhouse effect ... is changing our climate now".
But by 1989, organisations were already appearing pursuing overt strategies - copied from the tobacco industry - to sow doubt about the validity and credibility of the scientific alarm, downplay the significance of evidence and demobilise meaningful political action. From the beginning, climate denial has been driven by two conflating forces; the financial interests of fossil fuel companies and a conservative political movement that sees environmental regulation as a challenge to ideological preferences for private property, neoliberal economics and borderless capitalism. Denialist thinktanks like the Heartland Institute praise themselves for service to an "ultimate goal" that has, of course,            nothing to do with facts or science, but instead "to keep global warming alarmists from winning the public debate".
This is the decades-long frame into which Bolt and his comrades slip. A non-scientist himself, Bolt's analysis more or less always conforms to a pattern perfected worldwide; locate an isolated item of contradictory, impenetrable data and insist its existence proves climate science is a shibboleth of untruth,            misquote a credible scientist, quote a            non-credible one, and insist all climate activists are unhinged            loons.
How bleak it is now, with Canberra burning, to revisit Bolt's comments of 2006, when he was the subject of a Media Watch investigation of his selective misstatements on climate data. "Some people believe that bushfires may get worse in the future because of man-made global warming," announced Media Watch, "Andrew Bolt isn't one of them." By 2009, so tight was the grip of denialism over the discourse, if not the facts, that Bolt felt confident enough to declare "this mad global warming scare could at last be over".
Really?
2009 was the same year that future prime minister, Tony Abbott similarly declared "the climate change argument is absolute crap", one more example of the impressive cohesion of conservative commentary with its political result. A side note: not one 2016 Republican candidate for president accepted the science of climate change. Back here, denialist MPs such as the internationally embarrassing            Craig Kelly are frequent guests of Bolt's show.
What to make of Bolt's most recent concession to the reality of actual climate change is what his insistent "good thing, overall" messaging reveals of the new political reality facing the conservative movement. Unlike an election result that can be willed into existence through sheer force of persuasion, the planet is not actually persuadable. The ideological resistance among conservatives to address the source of climate crisis is so powerful, so historically entrenched, that flames literally surround the city in which the conservative Australian prime minister himself has announced that "resilience and adaptation" amid the fires will substitute for climate mitigation, prevention, action to make them stop. On cue, the megaphones insist this nightmare will be good for us.
Take it from one of the selectively misquoted credible scientists : global heating is not heralding a            new agricultural prosperity, these forces are causing forests to burn, not to bloom. They can't offer solutions. The propaganda of a new denial is all they've got.
 Van Badham is a Guardian Australia columnist

Load-Date: January 30, 2020


End of Document




Don't look away now, the climate crisis needs you; The Guardian is embarking on a major series of articles on the climate crisis and how humanity can solve it. In the first, an extract taken from the Introduction to THIS CHANGES EVERYTHING by Naomi Klein, the author argues that if we treat climate change as the crisis it is, we don't just have the potential to avert disaster but could improve society in the process
The Guardian
March 16, 2015 Monday 4:49 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 4102 words
Byline: Naomi Klein
Body


A voice came over the intercom: would the passengers of Flight 3935, scheduled to depart Washington DC, for Charleston, South Carolina, kindly collect their carry-on luggage and get off the plane. They went down the stairs and gathered on the hot tarmac. There they saw something unusual: the wheels of the US Airways jet had sunk into the black pavement as if it were wet cement. The wheels were lodged so deep, in fact, that the truck that came to tow the plane away couldn't pry it loose. The airline had hoped that without the added weight of the flight's 35 passengers, the aircraft would be light enough to pull. It wasn't. Someone posted a picture : "Why is my flight cancelled? Because DC is so damn hot that our plane sank four inches into the pavement." 
Eventually, a larger, more powerful vehicle was brought in to tow the plane and this time it worked; the plane finally took off, three hours behind schedule. A spokesperson for the airline blamed the incident on "very unusual temperatures". 
The temperatures in the summer of 2012 were indeed unusually hot. (As they were the year before and the year after.) And it's no mystery why this has been happening: the profligate burning of fossil fuels, the very thing that US Airways was bound and determined to do despite the inconvenience presented by a melting tarmac. This irony - the fact that the burning of fossil fuels is so radically changing our climate that it is getting in the way of our capacity to burn fossil fuels - did not stop the passengers of Flight 3935 from re-embarking and continuing their journeys. Nor was climate change mentioned in any of the major news coverage of the incident. 
I am in no position to judge these passengers. All of us who live high consumer lifestyles, wherever we happen to reside, are, metaphorically, passengers on Flight 3935. Faced with a crisis that threatens our survival as a species, our entire culture is continuing to do the very thing that caused the crisis, only with an extra dose of elbow grease behind it. Like the airline bringing in a truck with a more powerful engine to tow that plane, the global economy is upping the ante from conventional sources of fossil fuels to even dirtier and more dangerous versions - bitumen from the Alberta tar sands, oil from deepwater drilling, gas from hydraulic fracturing (fracking), coal from detonated mountains, and so on.
Meanwhile, each supercharged natural disaster produces new irony laden snapshots of a climate increasingly inhospitable to the very industries most responsible for its warming. Like the 2013 historic floods in Calgary that forced the head offices of the oil companies mining the Alberta tar sands to go dark and send their employees home, while a train carrying flammable petroleum products teetered on the edge of a disintegrating rail bridge. Or the drought that hit the Mississippi river one year earlier, pushing water levels so low that barges loaded with oil and coal were unable to move for days, while they waited for the Army Corps of Engineers to dredge a channel (they had to appropriate funds allocated to rebuild from the previous year's historic flooding along the same waterway). Or the coal-fired power plants in other parts of the country that were temporarily shut down because the waterways that they draw on to cool their machinery were either too hot or too dry (or, in some cases, both).
Living with this kind of cognitive dissonance is simply part of being alive in this jarring moment in history, when a crisis we have been studiously ignoring is hitting us in the face - and yet we are doubling down on the stuff that is causing the crisis in the first place. 
I denied climate change for longer than I care to admit. I knew it was happening, sure. Not like Donald Trump and the Tea Partiers going on about how the continued existence of winter proves it's all a hoax. But I stayed pretty hazy on the details and only skimmed most of the news stories, especially the really scary ones. I told myself the science was too complicated and that the environmentalists were dealing with it. And I continued to behave as if there was nothing wrong with the shiny card in my wallet attesting to my "elite" frequent flyer status. 
A great many of us engage in this kind of climate change denial. We look for a split second and then we look away. Or we look but then turn it into a joke ("more signs of the Apocalypse!"). Which is another way of looking away. Or we look but tell ourselves comforting stories about how humans are clever and will come up with a technological miracle that will safely suck the carbon out of the skies or magically turn down the heat of the sun. Which, I was to discover while researching this book, is yet another way of looking away. 
Or we look but try to be hyper-rational about it ("dollar for dollar it's more efficient to focus on economic development than climate change, since wealth is the best protection from weather extremes") - as if having a few more dollars will make much difference when your city is underwater. Or we look but tell ourselves we are too busy to care about something so distant and abstract - even though we saw the water in the subways in New York City during Superstorm Sandy, and the people on their rooftops in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, and know that no one is safe, the most vulnerable least of all. And though perfectly understandable, this too is a way of looking away. 
Or we look but tell ourselves that all we can do is focus on ourselves. Meditate and shop at farmers' markets and stop driving - but forget trying to actually change the systems that are making the crisis inevitable because that's too much "bad energy" and it will never work. And at first it may appear as if we are looking, because many of these lifestyle changes are indeed part of the solution, but we still have one eye tightly shut. 
Or maybe we do look - really look - but then, inevitably, we seem to forget. Remember and then forget again. Climate change is like that; it's hard to keep it in your head for very long. We engage in this odd form of on-again-off-again ecological amnesia for perfectly rational reasons. We deny because we fear that letting in the full reality of this crisis will change everything. And we are right. 
We know that if we continue on our current path of allowing emissions to rise year after year, climate change will change everything about our world. Major cities will very likely drown, ancient cultures will be swallowed by the seas, and there is a very high chance that our children will spend a great deal of their lives fleeing and recovering from vicious storms and extreme droughts. And we don't have to do anything to bring about this future. All we have to do is nothing. Just continue to do what we are doing now, whether it's counting on a techno-fix or tending to our gardens or telling ourselves we're unfortunately too busy to deal with it. 
All we have to do is not react as if this is a full-blown crisis. All we have to do is keep on denying how frightened we actually are. And then, bit by bit, we will have arrived at the place we most fear, the thing from which we have been averting our eyes. No additional effort required. 
There are ways of preventing this grim future, or at least making it a lot less dire. But the catch is that these also involve changing everything. For us high consumers, it involves changing how we live, how our economies function, even the stories we tell about our place on earth. The good news is that many of these changes are distinctly uncatastrophic. Many are downright exciting. But I didn't discover this for a long while. 
 In 2009, when the financial crisis was in full swing, the massive response from governments around the world showed what was possible when our elites decided to declare a crisis. 
We all watched as trillions of dollars were marshaled in a moment. If the banks were allowed to fail, we were told, the rest of the economy would collapse. It was a matter of collective survival, so the money had to be found. In the process, some rather large fictions at the heart of our economic system were exposed (Need more money? Print some!). A few years earlier, governments took a similar approach to public finances after the September 11 terrorist attacks. In many western countries, when it came to constructing the security/surveillance state at home and waging war abroad, budgets never seemed to be an issue.
 Related: The argument for divesting from fossil fuels is becoming an overwhelming one | Alan Rusbridger
Climate change has never received the crisis treatment from our leaders, despite the fact that it carries the risk of destroying lives on a vastly greater scale than collapsed banks or collapsed buildings. The cuts to our greenhouse gas emissions that scientists tell us are necessary in order to greatly reduce the risk of catastrophe are treated as nothing more than gentle suggestions, actions that can be put off pretty much indefinitely. Clearly, what gets declared a crisis is an expression of power and priorities as much as hard facts. But we need not be spectators in all this: politicians aren't the only ones with the power to declare a crisis. Mass movements of regular people can declare one too. 
Slavery wasn't a crisis for British and American elites until abolitionism turned it into one. Racial discrimination wasn't a crisis until the civil rights movement turned it into one. Sex discrimination wasn't a crisis until feminism turned it into one. Apartheid wasn't a crisis until the anti-apartheid movement turned it into one. 
In the very same way, if enough of us stop looking away and decide that climate change is a crisis worthy of what some have called a "Marshall Plan for the Earth," then it will become one, and the political class will have to respond, both by making resources available and by bending the free market rules that have proven so pliable when elite interests are in peril. We occasionally catch glimpses of this potential when a crisis puts climate change at the front of our minds for a while. "Money is no object in this relief effort. Whatever money is needed for it will be spent," declared British prime minister David Cameron - Mr Austerity himself - when large parts of the UK were underwater from historic flooding in February 2014 and the public was enraged that his government was not doing more to help. 
I have begun to understand how climate change - if treated as a true planetary emergency akin to those rising flood waters - could become a galvanising force for humanity, leaving us all not just safer from extreme weather, but with societies that are safer and fairer in all kinds of other ways as well. The resources required to rapidly move away from fossil fuels and prepare for the coming heavy weather could pull huge swaths of humanity out of poverty, providing services now sorely lacking, from clean water to electricity, and on a model that is more democratic and less centralized than the models of the past. This is a vision of the future that goes beyond just surviving or enduring climate change, beyond "mitigating" and "adapting" to it in the grim language of the United Nations. It is a vision in which we collectively use the crisis to leap somewhere that seems, frankly, better than where we are right now. 
Once the lens shifted from one of crisis to possibility, I discovered that I no longer feared immersing myself in the scientific reality of the climate threat. And like many others, I have begun to see all kinds of ways that climate change could become a catalysing force for positive change - how it could be the best argument progressives have ever had to demand the rebuilding and reviving of local economies; to re-claim our democracies from corrosive corporate influence; to block harmful new free trade deals and rewrite old ones; to invest in starving public infrastructure like mass transit and affordable housing; and to take back ownership of essential services like energy and water. All of which would help to end grotesque levels of inequality within our nations and between them.
There is a rich populist history of winning big victories for social and economic justice in the midst of large-scale crises. These include, most notably, the policies of the New Deal after the market crash of 1929 and the birth of countless social programs after the second world war. This did not require the kind of authoritarian trickery that I described in my last book, The Shock Doctrine. On the contrary, what was essential was building muscular mass movements capable of standing up to those defending a failing status quo, and that demanded a significantly fairer share of the economic pie for everyone. A few of the lasting (though embattled) legacies of these exceptional historical moments include: public health insurance in many countries, old age pensions, subsidised housing, and public funding for the arts.
I am convinced that climate change represents a historic opportunity on an even greater scale. As part of the project of getting our emissions down to the levels many scientists recommend, we once again have the chance to advance policies that dramatically improve lives, close the gap between rich and poor, create huge numbers of good jobs, and reinvigorate democracy from the ground up. 
But before any of these changes can happen - before we can believe that climate change can change us - we first have to stop looking away.
 "You have been negotiating all my life." So said Canadian college student Anjali Appadurai, as she stared down the assembled government negotiators at the 2011 United Nations climate conference in Durban, South Africa. She was not exaggerating. 
The world's governments have been talking about preventing climate change for more than two decades; they began negotiating the year that Anjali, then 21 years old, was born. And yet as she pointed out in her memorable speech on the convention floor, delivered on behalf of all of the assembled young people: "In that time, you've failed to meet pledges, you've missed targets, and you've broken promises." In truth, the intergovernmental body entrusted to prevent "dangerous" levels of climate change has not only failed to make progress over its 20-odd years of work (and almost 100 official negotiation meetings since the agreement was adopted), it has overseen a process of virtually uninterrupted backsliding. Our governments wasted years fudging numbers and squabbling over start dates, perpetually trying to get extensions like undergrads with late term papers.
The catastrophic result of all this obfuscation and procrastination is now undeniable. In 2013, global carbon dioxide emissions were 61% higher than they were in 1990, when negotiations toward a climate treaty began in earnest. Indeed the only thing rising faster than our emissions is the output of words pledging to lower them. Meanwhile, the annual UN climate summit, which remains the best hope for a political breakthrough on climate action, has started to seem less like a forum for serious negotiation than a very costly and high-carbon group therapy session, a place for the representatives of the most vulnerable countries in the world to vent their grief and rage while low-level representatives of the nations largely responsible for their tragedies stare at their shoes.
 Related: Guardian Live stream: Naomi Klein
Though momentum is picking up slightly ahead of December's critical negotiations in Paris, this has been the mood ever since the collapse of the much-hyped 2009 UN climate summit in Copenhagen. On the last night of that massive gathering, I found myself with a group of climate justice activists, including one of the most prominent campaigners in Britain. 
Throughout the summit, this young man had been the picture of confidence and composure, briefing dozens of journalists a day on what had gone on during each round of negotiations and what the various emission targets meant in the real world. Despite the challenges, his optimism about the summit's prospects never flagged. Once it was all over, however, and the pitiful deal was done, he fell apart before our eyes. Sitting in an overlit Italian restaurant, he began to sob uncontrollably. "I really thought Obama understood," he kept repeating.
I have come to think of that night as the climate movement's coming of age: it was the moment when the realisation truly sank in that no one was coming to save us. The British psychoanalyst and climate specialist Sally Weintrobe describes this as the summit's "fundamental legacy" - the acute and painful realisation that our "leaders are not looking after us... we are not cared for at the level of our very survival." No matter how many times we have been disappointed by the failings of our politicians, this realisation still comes as a blow. It really is the case that we are on our own and any credible source of hope in this crisis will have to come from below.
In Copenhagen, the major polluting governments - including the US and China - signed a nonbinding agreement pledging to keep temperatures from increasing more than 2C above where they were before we started powering our economies with coal. This well-known target, which supposedly represents the "safe" limit of climate change, has always been a highly political choice that has more to do with minimising economic disruption than with protecting the greatest number of people. When the two degrees target was made official in Copenhagen, there were impassioned objections from many delegates who said the goal amounted to a "death sentence" for some low-lying island states, as well as for large parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. In fact it is a very risky target for all of us : so far, temperatures have increased by just 0.8C and we are already experiencing many alarming impacts, including the unprecedented melting of the Greenland ice sheet in the summer of 2012 and the acidification of oceans far more rapidly than expected. Allowing temperatures to warm by more than twice that amount will unquestionably have perilous consequences.
In a 2012 report, the World Bank laid out the gamble implied by that target. "As global warming approaches and exceeds two degrees Celsius, there is a risk of triggering nonlinear tipping elements. Examples include the disintegration of the West Antarctic ice sheet leading to more rapid sea-level rise, or large-scale Amazon dieback drastically affecting ecosystems, rivers, agriculture, energy production, and livelihoods. This would further add to 21st-century global warming and impact entire continents." In other words, once we allow temperatures to climb past a certain point, where the mercury stops is not in our control.
But the bigger problem - and the reason Copenhagen caused such great despair - is that because governments did not agree to binding targets, they are free to pretty much ignore their commitments. Which is precisely what is happening. Indeed, emissions are rising so rapidly that unless something radical changes within our economic structure, two degrees now looks like a utopian dream. And it's not just environmentalists who are raising the alarm. The World Bank also warned when it released its report that "we're on track for a 4C warmer world [by century's end] marked by extreme heat waves, declining global food stocks, loss of ecosystems and biodiversity, and life-threatening sea level rise." And the report cautioned that, "there is also no certainty that adaptation to a 4C world is possible." Kevin Anderson, former director (now deputy director) of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, which has quickly established itself as one of the UK's premier climate research institutions, is even blunter; he says 4C warming is "incompatible with any reasonable characterisation of an organised, equitable and civilised global community".
We don't know exactly what a 4C world would look like, but even the best-case scenario is likely to be calamitous. Four degrees of warming could raise global sea levels by one or possibly even two meters by 2100 (and would lock in at least a few additional meters over future centuries). This would drown some island nations such as the Maldives and Tuvalu, and inundate many coastal areas from Ecuador and Brazil to the Netherlands to much of California and the northeastern US, as well as huge swaths of South and south-east Asia. Major cities likely in jeopardy include Boston, New York, greater Los Angeles, Vancouver, London, Mumbai, Hong Kong, and Shanghai.
Meanwhile, brutal heat waves that can kill tens of thousands of people, even in wealthy countries, would become entirely unremarkable summer events on every continent but Antarctica. The heat would also cause staple crops to suffer dramatic yield losses across the globe (it is possible that Indian wheat and US corn could plummet by as much as 60%), this at a time when demand will be surging due to population growth and a growing demand for meat. When you add ruinous hurricanes, raging wildfires, fisheries collapses, widespread disruptions to water supplies, extinctions, and globe-trotting diseases to the mix, it indeed becomes difficult to imagine that a peaceful, ordered society could be sustained (that is, where such a thing exists in the first place).
Keep in mind that these are the optimistic scenarios in which warming is more or less stabilized at 4C and does not trigger tipping points beyond which runaway warming would occur. And this process may be starting sooner than anyone predicted. In May 2014, Nasa and University of California, Irvine scientists revealed that glacier melt in a section of West Antarctica roughly the size of France now " appears unstoppable". This likely spells eventual doom for the entire West Antarctic ice sheet, which according to lead study author Eric Rignot "comes with a sea level rise of between three and five metres. Such an event will displace millions of people worldwide." The disintegration, however, could unfold over centuries and there is still time for emission reductions to slow down the process and prevent the worst.
Much more frightening than any of this is the fact that plenty of mainstream analysts think that on our current emissions trajectory, we are headed for even more than four degrees of warming. In 2011, the usually staid International Energy Agency (IEA) issued a report projecting that we are actually on track for 6C - 10.8F - of warming. And as the IEA's chief economist Fatih Birol put it : "Everybody, even the school children, knows that this will have catastrophic implications for all of us."
These various projections are the equivalent of every alarm in your house going off simultaneously. And then every alarm on your street going off as well, one by one by one. They mean, quite simply, that climate change has become an existential crisis for the human species. The only historical precedent for a crisis of this depth and scale was the Cold War fear that we were heading toward nuclear holocaust, which would have made much of the planet uninhabitable. But that was (and remains) a threat; a slim possibility, should geopolitics spiral out of control. The vast majority of nuclear scientists never told us that we were almost certainly going to put our civilisation in peril if we kept going about our daily lives as usual, doing exactly what we were already doing, which is what the climate scientists have been telling us for years.
As the Ohio State University climatologist Lonnie G Thompson, a world-renowned specialist on glacier melt, explained in 2010, "Climatologists, like other scientists, tend to be a stolid group. We are not given to theatrical rantings about falling skies. Most of us are far more comfortable in our laboratories or gathering data in the field than we are giving interviews to journalists or speaking before Congressional committees. Why then are climatologists speaking out about the dangers of global warming? The answer is that virtually all of us are now convinced that global warming poses a clear and present danger to civilisation."
It doesn't get much clearer than that. And yet rather than responding with alarm and doing everything in our power to change course, large parts of humanity are, quite consciously, continuing down the same road. Only, like the passengers aboard Flight 3935, aided by a more powerful, dirtier engine. What is wrong with us?
    • Extracted from THIS CHANGES EVERYTHING : Capitalism vs the Climate by Naomi Klein published this week in paperback by Penguin, £8.99

Load-Date: March 16, 2015


End of Document




Nobel prize in economics won by Nordhaus and Romer for work on climate change and growth - as it happened; The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences has been awarded to two American men for work on climate change and sustainable growthBREAKING: Nobel Prize awarded to Nordhaus and RomerWhy they wonThe official announcementRomer: Climate change crisis can be fixed, if we work at itEarlier:Introduction: Biggest prize in economics awarded todayThese women missed out again
The Guardian(London)
October 8, 2018 Monday 9:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Version:11
Length: 10563 words
Byline: Graeme Wearden
Body


block-time published-time 2.01pm BST 
 Read the full story  
And finally, here's our news story on today's Nobel prize in economics.
 Related:  US economists win Nobel prize for work on climate and growth
That's the end of the Nobel season for another year. Thanks for following our coverage. Congratulations to all the winners, and better luck next time to everyone else. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.01pm BST
block-time published-time 1.58pm BST 
 Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown may have smiled at Romer's success. 
Back in the 1990s, Labour's Brown gave a famous speech on "Post Neo-classical Endogenous Growth Theory". It was cowritten with Ed Balls, then his youngish assistant (later shadow chancellor, then Strictly Come Dancing star).
 Related:  Gordon Brown's Ode to Post Neo-classical Endogenous Growth Theory
The speech was later mocked by right-winger Michael Heseltine, with the side-splitting pun that 'it wasn't Brown's, it was Balls'.
Ho ho ho. But Brown and Balls' point, that growth relies on investment, technological progress, and innovation, remains true and important today. 
enltrAlso Brits with long memories may recall Gordon Brown being sneered at when he gave a speech as shadow chancellor mentioning endogenous growth theory. That's the thing that earned Paul Romer the Nobel, since you ask. https://t.co/CCFQ4A1EUf
 - Alan Beattie (@alanbeattie) October 8, 2018
 Gordon Brown being sneered at when he gave a speech as shadow chancellor mentioning endogenous growth theory.
block-time published-time 1.47pm BST 
 Paul Romer's success comes nine months after he quit the World Bank, where he was chief economist, under a dark cloud. 
Romer had clashed with World Bank staff on several issues, including the worthiness of the methodology used in its reports. At one point, he demanded they use the word 'and' less frequently, saying it was a lever to get political points across.
His term ended abruptly after he claimed that Bank staff had manipulated the data in its "Doing Business" rankings, suggesting that Chile had been unfairly pushed down the rankings.
enltrThe word "and" appears 493 times in the 17,000-word essay explaining the Economics Nobel Prize - or 2.9%. Laureate Paul Romer told staff at the World Bank he would not publish their reports if the proportion exceeded 2.6%. https://t.co/o9ExNnck9U
 - Peter Thal Larsen (@peter_tl) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 1.40pm BST 
PSA: If you're a world expert, and your phone rings early one October morning, try picking up the receiver....
enltrPaul Romer tells me he didn't answer the phone when it rang early this morning. He figured it was spam. Then he checked caller ID and saw it was from Sweden. So he called back and, after waiting on hold, learned he'd won the Nobel Prize.
- Binyamin Appelbaum (@BCAppelbaum) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 1.30pm BST 
Here's a clip of Paul Romer talking about his award, and the work behind it.
enltr"My work teaches us that what happens with technology is under our control." This year's Economic Sciences laureate Paul Romer reminds us that technology doesn't just happen to us like the weather. It is a tool we can control. Full telephone interview: https://t.co/dRjPym4OuL
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 1.15pm BST 
 Tyler Cowen: Why Nordhaus and Romer won  
 Economics professor Tyler Cowen is doing a great job collating information about the winners, and explaining their work is influential and important. 
Here's a flavour of his work on William Nordhaus:
Nordhaus is professor at Yale, and most of all he is known for his work on climate change models, and his connection to various concepts of " green accounting." To the best of my knowledge, Nordhaus started working on green accounting in 1972, when he published with James Tobin (also a Laureate) "            Is Growth Obsolete? ", which raised the key question of sustainability. Green accounting attempts to outline how environmental degradation can be measured against economic growth. This endeavor is not so easy, however, as environmental damage can be hard to measure and furthermore gdp is a "flow" and the environment is (often, not always) best thought of as a "stock."
Nordhaus developed (with co-authors) the Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy Model, a pioneering effort to develop a general approach to estimating the costs of climate change. Subsequent efforts, such as the London IPCC group, have built directly on Nordhaus's work in this area. The EPA still uses a variant of this model. The model was based on earlier work by Nordhaus himself in the 1970s, and he refined it over time in a series of books and articles, culminating in several books in the 1990s. Here is            his well-cited piece, with Mendelsohn and Shaw, on how climate change will affect global agriculture.
Nordhaus also was an early advocate of a carbon tax and furthermore he wrote part of the Clean Air Act, the part that gave the government the right to regulate hitherto-unmentioned pollutants in the future. The Obama administration, in its later attempts to regulate climate, cited this provision.
enltrMy growing and under-revision take on why William Nordhaus won the Nobel Prize in economics: https://t.co/QTI73TD5Yr
 - tylercowen (@tylercowen) October 8, 2018
And on Paul Romer, Tyler explains:
Romer has been a central figure behind the notion of "charter cities," namely an economic region but with external or possibly foreign governance, so as to enforce the rule of law and spur economic growth. The charter cities idea comes rather naturally out of Romer's work on the economics of growth. Think of Romer as asking "which is the non-rival public good which can be extended at very low cost?", and wondering if that might be law. Here is            his famous TED talk on charter cities. Here is            an interview with Romer on charter cities. He was originally slated to work with the Honduran government on charter cities, though he dropped out of the project in 2012. Here is            Paul's account of what happened.
Amihai Glazer and I once wrote a comment on Romer, on            his article with Barro on ski-lift pricing, which Glazer and I saw as closely connected to Buchanan's theory of clubs. Romer later credited this comment with inducing him to rethink what the notion of rivalry really means in economics, and leading to his two best-known pieces on economic growth; see the David Warsh book for more detail.
Like myself, Romer is an avid fan of the guitarist Clarence White, and several times we have traded favorite Clarence White videos by email. Romer believes (correctly) that the role of Clarence White in the success of the Byrds is very much underrated, and furthermore he is a big fan of White's            early work with the Kentucky Colonels.
enltrMy post on the economic contributions of Paul Romer, https://t.co/Ges8TvxQxT, being steadily revised too,            @paulmromer
 - tylercowen (@tylercowen) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 1.01pm BST 
Here's a handy explanation of Paul Romer's work on endogenous growth:
block-time published-time 12.50pm BST 
Associated Press agrees that today's award is timely, as the UN calls for fresh action on climate change: 
William Nordhaus in the 1990s became the first person to create a model that "describes the global interplay between the economy and the climate," the academy said. He showed that "the most efficient remedy for problems caused by greenhouse gases is a global scheme of universally imposed carbon taxes."
The prize comes just a day after an international panel of scientists issued a report detailing how Earth's weather, health and ecosystems would be in better shape if the world's leaders could somehow limit future human-caused warming to just 0.9 degrees Fahrenheit (a half degree Celsius) from now, instead of the globally agreed-upon goal of 1.8 degrees F (1 degree C)
Nordhaus has argued that climate change should be considered a "global public good," like public health and international trade, and regulated accordingly, but not through a command-and-control approach. Instead, by agreeing on a global price for burning carbon that reflects its whole cost, this primary cause of rising temperatures could be traded and taxed, putting market forces to work on the problem.
block-time published-time 12.35pm BST 
 Harvard economist Gernot Wagner says that both winners have made huge strides towards tackling climate change. 
Nordhaus's pioneering cost-benefit models for global warming, and Romer's work on how well-regulated markets can spur technological development and sustainable economic progress, and ultimately faster growth.
enltrPerfect timing to have Bill Nordhaus win the @NobelPrize the day the 1.5°C            @IPCC_CH report comes out. But the same goes for            @PaulMRomer winning with Bill. Lemme explain...            https://t.co/mtt5AEmxga
 - Gernot Wagner (@GernotWagner) October 8, 2018
enltrFirst off, IPCC says there are dire consequences of moving beyond 1.5°C, and difference to 2°C, or even 3°C, 4°C or higher matters. All of this matters. pic.twitter.com/xlpO0IS6RK
 - Gernot Wagner (@GernotWagner) October 8, 2018
enltrEven before his DICE model (first published in 1992 in Science), Bill helped put the costs of climate change on economists' minds.
- Gernot Wagner (@GernotWagner) October 8, 2018
enltrHow does @PaulMRomer fit in here? Look at the very first graph in the IPCC report summary, bottom left panel: to limit global warming to anything near 1.5°C requires massive decarbonization. That takes massive innovation, Paul's specialty.            pic.twitter.com/3TsnzVWlAQ
 - Gernot Wagner (@GernotWagner) October 8, 2018
enltrUnderstanding how one integrates "technological innovations into long-run macroeconomic analysis" is at the core of turning the climate ship around.
- Gernot Wagner (@GernotWagner) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36pm BST
block-time published-time 12.05pm BST 
Paul Romer's website is creaking under the strain!
enltrFYI, the little cloud server that is running my blog is having trouble keeping up with the load. It is working for me. If you get a 404, you might want to try again in a few minutes.
- Paul Romer (@paulmromer) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 12.00pm BST 
 The Nobel Prize committee have created a 'Popular Science' backgrounder, for anyone trying to get up to speed on today's winners. 
It explains how Bill Nordhaus and Paul Romer developed tools to show how market economy affects nature and knowledge, dating back several decades.
Here's a flavour:
Nordhaus became the first person to design simple, but dynamic and quantitative models of the global economic-climate system, now called integrated assessment models (IAMs).
His tools allow us to simulate how the economy and climate would co-evolve in the future under alternative assumptions about the workings of nature and the market economy, including relevant policies. His models address questions about the desirability of different global scenarios and specific policy interventions.
enltrLaureate William Nordhaus' research shows that the most efficient remedy for problems caused by greenhouse gas emissions is a global scheme of carbon taxes uniformly imposed on all countries. The diagram shows CO2 emissions for four climate policies according to his simulations. pic.twitter.com/tmxUE6MiLn
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
And on market imperfections..
Romer showed that unregulated markets will produce technological change, but tend to underprovide R&D and the new goods created by it. Addressing this under-provision requires well-designed government interventions, such as R&D subsidies and patent regulation. His analysis says that such policies are vital to long-run growth, not just within a country but globally. 
enltrRomer's research laid the foundation of what is now called endogenous growth theory. The theory has generated vast amounts of new research into the regulations and policies that encourage new ideas and long-term prosperity. #NobelPrize
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.18pm BST
block-time published-time 11.56am BST 
 Romer: Read this!  
Nobel laureate Paul Romer has been tweeting.
He's flagged up an article explaining why he is optimistic that climate change can be tackled, with firm action.
It says:
The practical insight is that there are two very different types of optimism. Complacent optimism is the feeling of a child waiting for presents. Conditional optimism is the feeling of a child who is thinking about building a treehouse. "If I get some wood and nails and persuade some other kids to help do the work, we can end up with something really cool."
What the theory of endogenous technological progress supports is conditional optimism, not complacent optimism. Instead of suggesting that we can relax because policy choices don't matter, it suggests to the contrary that policy choices are even more important than traditional theory suggests.
enltrA post from July 2016 that bears on the announcement today by The Nobel Prize committee: https://t.co/vP1WWPVZ4x
 - Paul Romer (@paulmromer) October 8, 2018
He's also flagged up a second article, that explains how small changes in economic growth can have a powerful long-term impact.
For example:
A rough guide to the doubling time for any rate of growth is to divide it into 70. For example, if something grows at 7% per year, you can infer that it doubles every 10 years because 70 / 7 = 10. If it grows at 3.5% per year, it takes 20 years to double. Taking twice as long to double may not sound so bad, but remember the difference between using just the white squares or all the squares on the chessboard. Or consider what happens over the course of a century. A doubling time of 20 years means doubling 5 times in a century, which produces an increase by a factor of 32. Doubling 10 times produces an increase by a factor of 1024.
enltrFor some background on my work on economic growth, this post might also be helpful: https://t.co/dUaOk41JSp
 - Paul Romer (@paulmromer) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 11.52am BST 
David Pendelbury, scientific manager at Clarivate Analytics (who draw up the list of Nobel frontrunners based on academic citations ), agrees that these are worthy winners:
"It is a crowning achievement for William D. Nordhaus, Sterling Professor of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA, and Paul Michael Romer, New York University Stern School of Business, and Hoover Institution, Stanford, California, to be recognized by 2018 Nobel Prize in Economics.
We named both as Citation Laureates in 2009 and 2005 respectively, due to an exceptionally high level of citations to their works by the research community.
block-time published-time 11.43am BST 
enltr"It is entirely possible for humans to produce less carbon... Once we start to try to reduce carbon emissions, we'll be surprised that it wasn't as hard as we anticipated," says Paul Romer at the press conference announcing his Prize in Economic Sciences. #NobelPrize
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 11.33am BST 
 Nordhaus and Romer win for 'big ideas'  
 Professor Justin Wolfers of the University of Michigan says Romer and Nordhaus are worthy winners, for asking the 'big questions' about economics and the world we live in. 
enltrNobel Prize goes to the great Bill Nordhaus -- the founder of modern environmental economics, joint with Paul Romer, who founded the modern innovation-driven approach to understanding economic growth.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrBoth Bill and Paul have long been tipped to one day win the Nobel. So this will be a popular prize among his fellow economists. The timing of Nordhaus' prize -- coming as the IPCC says that action to warns us that action is necessary -- is perfect.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrAt one level, this prize doesn't seem like an obvious combination -- both are somewhat related to modern growth theory, but not in any particularly coordinated or similar fashion.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrBut the Nordhaus-Romer pairing makes sense, because they each point to contradictions at the heart of capitalism. It's all about market failure. Left alone, markets will generate too much pollution (Nordhaus) and too few ideas (Romer).
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrThe common thread is that smart government policies -- that tame, harness and direct economic forces -- are essential if the economy is to deliver good outcomes in the long run. These are important ideas which are used every day in modern policy debates.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrPaul and Bill are both Americans, and use the modern formal toolkit. Each has spent their careers starting with abstract economic ideas based on difficult greek letters, and working out their practical implications for policy.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrThis is, for sure, a Nobel Prize about the big questions. For Nordhaus, it's about asking how can we grow the economy without destroying our planet? And for Romer, it's about asking what's in the engine room that drives economic growth, and how can we keep it going?
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
enltrBoth Bill and Paul are also superb economic educators. Nordhaus came on as a coauthor of the most important economic textbook ever written (Samuelson's "Economics" because Nordhaus & Samuelson), and Romer founded Aplia, which was the first big shove moving econ education online.
- Justin Wolfers (@JustinWolfers) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.34am BST
block-time published-time 11.29am BST 
Reaction is starting to flood in.
Oxford University researcher Max Roser says Nordhaus and Romer are a great choice:
Two researchers who dedicated their lives to study the big transitions in human history by taking a very long run view on how we got to now and where we are heading. Congratulations to both of them.
enltrPaul Romer told me it was a chart that got him into studying economics. He looked at this line and wondered how something like this is possible. Today, decades later, he wins the Nobel Prize for contributing to the answer on how it is possible. [source https://t.co/RDdsXbMz4j ]            pic.twitter.com/xmI27hdyZJ
 - Max Roser (@MaxCRoser) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 11.25am BST 
You probably wouldn't put William Nordhaus's climate change work in the same boat as Paul Romer's  work on heathy, sustainable economic growth.
But the committee at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences insist that these two macroeconomists have more in common than first appears.
 Committee member Per Krusell,  a Swedish macroeconomist, says that both men are really part of the same agenda, thinking about 'long-run, global' issues.
Krussell adds that Romer and Nordhaus have a similar view about economic policy, and market failure, even though superficially they may look different.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.48am BST
block-time published-time 11.21am BST 
Q: Did you expect to win the award?
Apparently not! Paul Romer reveals that he ignored two phone calls today because he assumed they were spam calls. Fortunately the committee got through in the end....
block-time published-time 11.17am BST 
 Paul Romer adds that optimism is a vital ingredient to tackling hard problems such as climate change.
"One problem today is that people think protecting the environment will be so costly and so hard that they want to ignore the problem and pretend it doesn't exist.
Humans are capable of amazing accomplishments if we set our minds to it.
block-time published-time 11.16am BST 
 Romer: We can fix climate change  
 Paul Romer is on the phone now, sounding understandably bouncy. 
Asked about the IPCC's warning on climate change, Romer says that the world can fix the problem, if we start now.
He also argues that dire warnings that the future of the planet is in doubt don't help.
As Romer puts it:
Once we start to try to reduce carbon emissions, we'll be surprised that it wasn't as hard as we anticipated.
The danger with very alarming forecasts is that it will make people feel apathetic and hopeless.
It is "totally doable", even now, to start bringing down carbon emissions...while also improving standards of living and sustaining growth, Romer says.
If we do the right thing, everything can keep going better. but it is time to do the right thing, Romer adds.
block-time published-time 11.10am BST 
 Here's the official announcement  
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences has decided to award the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2018 to
 William D. Nordhaus, Yale University, New Haven, USA
"for integrating climate change into long-run macroeconomic analysis"
and
 Paul M. Romer, NYU Stern School of Business, New York, USA
"for integrating technological innovations into long-run macroeconomic analysis".
 William D. Nordhaus and Paul M. Romer have designed methods for addressing some of our time's most basic and pressing questions about how we create long-term sustained and sustainable economic growth. 
At its heart, economics deals with the management of scarce resources. Nature dictates the main constraints on economic growth and our knowledge determines how well we deal with these constraints. This year's Laureates William Nordhaus and Paul Romer have significantly broadened the scope of economic analysis by constructing models that explain how the market economy interacts with nature and knowledge.
Technological change - Romer demonstrates how knowledge can function as a driver of long-term economic growth. When annual economic growth of a few per cent accumulates over decades, it transforms people's lives. Previous macroeconomic research had emphasised technological innovation as the primary driver of economic growth, but had not modelled how economic decisions and market conditions determine the creation of new technologies. Paul Romer solved this problem by demonstrating how economic forces govern the willingness of firms to produce new ideas and innovations.
Romer's solution, which was published in 1990, laid the foundation of what is now called endogenous growth theory. The theory is both conceptual and practical, as it explains how ideas are different to other goods and require specific conditions to thrive in a market. Romer's theory has generated vast amounts of new research into the regulations and policies that encourage new ideas and long-term prosperity.
Climate change - Nordhaus' findings deal with interactions between society and nature. Nordhaus decided to work on this topic in the 1970s, as scientists had become increasingly worried about the combustion of fossil fuel resulting in a warmer climate. In the mid-1990s, he became the first person to create an integrated assessment model, i.e. a quantitative model that describes the global interplay between the economy and the climate. His model integrates theories and empirical results from physics, chemistry and economics. Nordhaus' model is now widely spread and is used to simulate how the economy and the climate co-evolve. It is used to examine the consequences of climate policy interventions, for example carbon taxes.
The contributions of Paul Romer and William Nordhaus are methodological, providing us with fundamental insights into the causes and consequences of technological innovation and climate change. This year's Laureates do not deliver conclusive answers, but their findings have brought us considerably closer to answering the question of how we can achieve sustained and sustainable global economic growth.
block-time published-time 11.07am BST 
 Nordhaus and Romer feel like worthy winners. 
As mentioned earlier, William Nordhaus has been a pioneer on the vital issue of climate change - using models to show that policymakers are failing to measure the true impact of global warming.
Nordhaus's DICE computer model has made a huge difference. It: 
"integrates in an end-to-end fashion the economics, carbon cycle, climate science, and impacts in a highly aggregated model that allows a weighing of the costs and benefits of taking steps to slow greenhouse warming.
That's both important and urgent, on a day when the UN is warning there is just 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe.
The Endogenous Growth Theory, meanwhile, shows how growth is generated by internal rather than external factors.
That's important - it means that governments can make a real difference to the lives of their people through economic policy - from investment and education to fighting monopolies and protecting IP rights - rather than throwing their hands up and blaming factors beyond their control.
enltrBREAKING NEWS: °The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences has decided to award the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2018 to William D. Nordhaus and Paul M. Romer. #NobelPrize           pic.twitter.com/xUs6iSyI7h
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 11.00am BST 
Once again, none of the world's leading female economists have been recognised.
Commiserations to Esther Duflo, Anne Osborn Krueger, Claudia Goldin, Janet Currie, et al, and good luck for next year.
block-time published-time 10.56am BST 
 Why Nordhaus and Romer have won  
William Nordhaus is being recognised for his work on the damage caused by climate change.
Paul Romer has examined how economists can achieve a healthy rate of economic growth. 
The models that Nordhaus and Romer have created have helped with the development of economic growth, and with combatting climate change, we're hearing. 
They have taken macroeconomics to a global scale, to tackle some of the world's biggest problems, the Nobel Prize committee say.
block-time published-time 10.54am BST 
 AND THE WINNERS ARE 
enltrWilliam Nordhaus and Paul Romer, awarded the 2018 Prize in Economic Sciences, have designed methods that address some of our time's most fundamental and pressing issues: long-term sustainable growth in the global economy and the welfare of the world's population. #NobelPrize           pic.twitter.com/8WccazjrBb
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 10.53am BST 
 NORDHAUS AND ROMER WIN THE NOBEL  
The winners are William Nordhaus for his work on climate economics, and Paul Romer for his work on the endogenous growth theory.
block-time published-time 10.51am BST 
Today's prize is be awarded for innovation, climate and economic growth......
block-time published-time 10.50am BST 
Here we go....
block-time published-time 10.48am BST 
Usually the committee try to contact the winner (s) before the official announcement, so maybe they're struggling to get through.
This can be a problem if the prize is going to someone in America, for example, where it's still rather early (approaching 3am in California).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.48am BST
block-time published-time 10.44am BST 
Sounds like there's a small delay....
block-time published-time 10.41am BST 
The live feed is now working, so you can hear the scraping of chairs and nervous coughing in the Royal Swedish Academy. 
(I've embedded it in the top of this blog too).
block-time published-time 10.34am BST 
Here are some facts about today's prize:
 Number of Laureates in Economic Sciences 
 79  individuals have been awarded 1969-2017 ( List of all Laureates in Economic Sciences )
 Average age 
The average age of all Laureates* in Economic Sciences between 1969 and 2017 is 67 years. All Nobel Laureates listed by age
 Youngest Laureate in Economic Sciences 
To date, the youngest Laureate in Economic Sciences is Kenneth J. Arrow, who was 51 years old when he was awarded in 1972.
 Oldest Laureate in Economic Sciences 
The oldest Laureate in Economic Sciences to date is Leonid Hurwicz, who was 90 years old when he was awarded in 2007. He is also the oldest Laureate to be awarded in all Prize categories.
 Female Laureates in Economic Sciences 
Elinor Ostrom was the first female Laureate in Economic Sciences. Elinor Ostrom was awarded the Prize in 2009.
More here....
block-time published-time 10.32am BST 
Tension is rising in Stockholm as journalists await the news....
enltrThe press room is filling up at the Royal Swedish Academy ahead of the economics #NobelPrize announcement. Lots of different languages being spoken too            pic.twitter.com/MESCgZ5pqx
 - Catherine Edwards (@CatJREdwards) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 10.28am BST 
As well as the glory, today's winner will also receive a financial windfall of 9 million Swedish kronor. That's roughly £750,000, or $1m. 
If there are two or three laureates, they share the cash.
block-time published-time 10.15am BST 
Just half an hour to go...
enltrWho will be awarded this year's Prize in Economic Sciences? We'll be breaking the news at 11:45am (CEST). Join the discussion - use the hashtag: #NobelPrizePhoto: Alexander Mahmoud            pic.twitter.com/RKrOt11Gzz
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 8, 2018
block-time published-time 9.57am BST 
Those of us who propped up the bottom of the class can take heart from these words from last year's winner, Richard Thaler:
enltr"I wasn't a great student. My thesis advisor famously said: 'We didn't expect much of him'" - Richard Thaler, 2017 Laureate in Economic Sciences. Who will be awarded the 2018 Prize in Economic Sciences? Find out when we break the news right here tomorrow (8 October). pic.twitter.com/Ys8mipniYV
 - The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) October 7, 2018
block-time published-time 9.51am BST 
This (unscientific) Twitter poll suggests Esther Duflo would be a popular choice, if they're going to double the number of female winners to two.
enltrJust two more days until the winner of this year's Nobel prize in economics is announced! Which one of these brilliant female economists would you award the prize to?
- Ngaio Hotte (@nhotte) October 5, 2018
Andreas Wallström of Sweden's Nordea Markets also believes she's in the running....
enltrSwedish economist put Paul Romer as the most likely candidate. In my opinion, more timely winners would be William Nordhaus (environment) or Esther Duflo (development) https://t.co/YBFhlDOrGz
 - Andreas Wallström (@anwallstrom) October 8, 2018
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.52am BST
block-time published-time 9.50am BST 
Her's another prediction, from Francesco Trebbi, professor of economics at the University of British Columbia:
enltrThe Nobel Prize in Economics is next Monday. My prediction this year is Philippe Aghion, Peter Howitt, Paul Romer for endogenous growth theory. [we are still awarding the 1980s & macro/growth have been skipped for a while]
- Francesco Trebbi (@xftrebbi) October 1, 2018
The endogenous growth theory argue that most economic growth is generated from within a system as a direct result of internal processes, such as capital investment, investing in human capital, protecting intellectual property rights.
block-time published-time 9.31am BST 
 US economics professor Tyler Cowen has predicted that it might be Duflo and Banerjee's year..... 
But given his forecasting record is as bad as mine, that's not a given. 
Cowen says :
I've never once gotten it right, at least not for exact timing, so my apologies to anyone I pick (sorry Bill Baumol!). Nonetheless this year I am in for Esther Duflo and Abihijit Banerjee, possibly with Michael Kremer, for randomized control trials in development economics.
Maybe they are too young, as Tim Harford points out, so my back-up pick remains an environmental prize for Bill Nordhaus, Partha Dasgupta, and Marty Weitzman.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.32am BST
block-time published-time 9.27am BST 
 Could it be a climate economist?  
 Perhaps a climate economist, such as William Nordhaus, could win this year's award. 
Nordhaus, a Yale University professor, has conducted key research into the economics of climate change, showing that mankind is ignoring the catastrophic cost of inaction.
His Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy (DICE) model showed the costs and benefits of taking steps to slow greenhouse warming.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.27am BST
block-time published-time 9.16am BST 
 Four women economists who deserve this year's Nobel Prize     French economist Esther Duflo Photograph: Patrick Kovarik/AFP/Getty Images   
 Shamefully, only one woman has ever won the Nobel prize for economics - Elinor Ostrom back in 2009. 
That could change today.
 Esther Duflo, the French-American economist, is in the running for her work on developing economies, including using randomized control trials to discover which anti-poverty initiatives work, and why.
Duflo is professor of Poverty Alleviation and Development Economics at MIT. With her partner Abhijit Banerjee, she has argued for a "radical rethinking" of how people in the poorest parts of the world actually live and act.
As the FT put it :
Duflo and Banerjee are students of detail. Is it better to give people mosquito nets or make them pay? What is the best method of getting children into schools, and ensuring that they learn?
Should you encourage immunisation by dispatching clinics to villages or reward parents with bags of rice? Or both? Or neither?
Duflo has already won a clutch of awards, including The John Bates Clark Medal (known as the 'mini Nobel'). She's only 45, though, so this year's award could be too soon for her (but you never know...)
Another option is Anne  Osborn  Krueger -- the US economist who coined the term 'rent-seeking' to describe the act of manipulating the social or political environment in which economic activities occur, rather than by creating new wealth.
Or how about Harvard economist Claudia Goldin, for her work studying the gender pay gap? She has argued that women are paid less than men because they seek jobs with more flexible hours or remote-work options, and in some professions there is a high penalty for taking any time out of the labour market. 
Or Princeton's Janet Currie ? She's an expert on healthcare issues such as early intervention programs, programs to expand health insurance and improve health care, public housing, and food and nutrition programs.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.19am BST
block-time published-time 9.06am BST 
 Who might win this year's prize?  
 Predicting Nobel winners is a tricky task, but that's no reason not to give it a go. 
Every year, researchers at Clarivate Analytics chew their way though the Web of Science citation index to calculate whose work has been cited particularly often, making them good candidates for a Nobel.
Here are their top predictions for this year :
    • Manuel Arellano, CEMFI, Madrid, Spain, and Stephen R. Bond, Oxford University, UK, for contributions to panel data analysis, especially the Arellano-Bond estimator. This method exploits time patterns in panel data to estimate the economic response to a change in a policy or other variable, while controlling for permanent unobserved confounding variation.
    • Wesley M. Cohen, Duke University, Durham, NC, and Daniel A. Levinthal, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, for their introduction and development of the concept of absorptive capacity (i.e., the ability of firms to evaluate, assimilate, and apply external knowledge) and its contribution to advancing our understanding of the innovative performance of firms, industries and nations.
    • David M. Kreps, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, for contributions to dynamic economic phenomena, in choice theory, finance, game theory, and organization theory.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.09am BST
block-time published-time 8.37am BST 
 Introduction: Nobel Prize for economics (sort of) awarded today  
 Good morning. Top economists across the globe will be watching their phones nervously today, or setting their alarm clocks a little earlier than usual. 
Because, around 10.45am UK time, someone's going to win the biggest prize in economics science.
The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences isn't one of the original ones, of course. The money doesn't come from the Nobel family profits from armaments trade, nor is it one of the original awards endowed by Alfred Nobel.
Instead, it's the creation of the Swedish central bank, designed to bring some glamour and recognition to the oft-criticised sphere of economics.
So, anyone complaining that it's 'not a real Nobel' can stay behind after class and clean the erasers.
enltr #NobelPrize in economics announced today! Here's a very handy anti-troll cartoon disclaimer. Forget the format, it's the winner(s) that matters.            pic.twitter.com/FjOd81cY5q
 - Maxime Sbaihi (@MxSba) October 8, 2018
The prize has recognised some of the biggest names and brightest ideas, since Ragnar Frisch and Jan Tinbergen shared the first award in 1969.
Since then, John Hicks, Friedrich Hayek, James Tobin, John Nash, Joe Stiglitz and Paul Krugman have all received that precious phone call from Sweden.
Last year the prize went to U.S. academic Richard Thaler, who helped popularise the idea of "nudging" people towards doing what was best for them. Other recent winners include Angus Deaton, for his work on inequality, and Jean Tirole for his analysis of monopolies and how to fight them.
Personally, I've never quite got over 2013, when Eugene Fama (father of the efficient market hypothesis) shared the award with Robert Shiller (who proved that markets aren't very efficient after all).
 Related:  Nobel prize-winning economists take disagreement to whole new level
This year's winner, or winners, will be announced sometime after 10.45am UK time (11.45am in Stockholm).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.17am BST
  4180 2018-10-11T08:00:00Z true 2018-10-08T08:00:32Z false false 2018-10-08T13:01:40Z false UK theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/9tfx4 false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/271641f618f40111c2b14a29c5eac9cb40e8d206/0_7_3500_2100/500.jpg false en And finally, here's our news story on today's Nobel prize in economics. That's the end of the Nobel season for another year. Thanks for following our coverage. Congratulations to all the winners, and better luck next time to everyone else. Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown may have smiled at Romer's success. Back in the 1990s, Labour's Brown gave a famous speech on "Post Neo-classical Endogenous Growth Theory". It was cowritten with Ed Balls, then his youngish assistant (later shadow chancellor, then Strictly Come Dancing star). The speech was later mocked by right-winger Michael Heseltine, with the side-splitting pun that 'it wasn't Brown's, it was Balls'. Ho ho ho. But Brown and Balls' point, that growth relies on investment, technological progress, and innovation, remains true and important today. Gordon Brown being sneered at when he gave a speech as shadow chancellor mentioning endogenous growth theory. Paul Romer's success comes nine months after he quit the World Bank, where he was chief economist, under a dark cloud. Romer had clashed with World Bank staff on several issues, including the worthiness of the methodology used in its reports. At one point, he demanded they use the word 'and' less frequently, saying it was a lever to get political points across. His term ended abruptly after he claimed that Bank staff had manipulated the data in its "Doing Business" rankings, suggesting that Chile had been unfairly pushed down the rankings. PSA: If you're a world expert, and your phone rings early one October morning, try picking up the receiver.... Here's a clip of Paul Romer talking about his award, and the work behind it. Economics professor Tyler Cowen is doing a great job collating information about the winners, and explaining their work is influential and important. Here's a flavour of his work on William Nordhaus: Nordhaus is professor at Yale, and most of all he is known for his work on climate change models, and his connection to various concepts of "green accounting." To the best of my knowledge, Nordhaus started working on green accounting in 1972, when he published with James Tobin (also a Laureate) "Is Growth Obsolete?", which raised the key question of sustainability. Green accounting attempts to outline how environmental degradation can be measured against economic growth. This endeavor is not so easy, however, as environmental damage can be hard to measure and furthermore gdp is a "flow" and the environment is (often, not always) best thought of as a "stock." Nordhaus developed (with co-authors) the Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy Model, a pioneering effort to develop a general approach to estimating the costs of climate change. Subsequent efforts, such as the London IPCC group, have built directly on Nordhaus's work in this area. The EPA still uses a variant of this model. The model was based on earlier work by Nordhaus himself in the 1970s, and he refined it over time in a series of books and articles, culminating in several books in the 1990s. Here is his well-cited piece, with Mendelsohn and Shaw, on how climate change will affect global agriculture. Nordhaus also was an early advocate of a carbon tax and furthermore he wrote part of the Clean Air Act, the part that gave the government the right to regulate hitherto-unmentioned pollutants in the future. The Obama administration, in its later attempts to regulate climate, cited this provision. And on Paul Romer, Tyler explains: Romer has been a central figure behind the notion of "charter cities," namely an economic region but with external or possibly foreign governance, so as to enforce the rule of law and spur economic growth. The charter cities idea comes rather naturally out of Romer's work on the economics of growth. Think of Romer as asking "which is the non-rival public good which can be extended at very low cost?", and wondering if that might be law. Here is his famous TED talk on charter cities. Here is an interview with Romer on charter cities. He was originally slated to work with the Honduran government on charter cities, though he dropped out of the project in 2012. Here is Paul's account of what happened. Amihai Glazer and I once wrote a comment on Romer, on his article with Barro on ski-lift pricing, which Glazer and I saw as closely connected to Buchanan's theory of clubs. Romer later credited this comment with inducing him to rethink what the notion of rivalry really means in economics, and leading to his two best-known pieces on economic growth; see the David Warsh book for more detail. Like myself, Romer is an avid fan of the guitarist Clarence White, and several times we have traded favorite Clarence White videos by email. Romer believes (correctly) that the role of Clarence White in the success of the Byrds is very much underrated, and furthermore he is a big fan of White's early work with the Kentucky Colonels. Here's a handy explanation of Paul Romer's work on endogenous growth: Associated Press agrees that today's award is timely, as the UN calls for fresh action on climate change: William Nordhaus in the 1990s became the first person to create a model that "describes the global interplay between the economy and the climate," the academy said. He showed that "the most efficient remedy for problems caused by greenhouse gases is a global scheme of universally imposed carbon taxes." The prize comes just a day after an international panel of scientists issued a report detailing how Earth's weather, health and ecosystems would be in better shape if the world's leaders could somehow limit future human-caused warming to just 0.9 degrees Fahrenheit (a half degree Celsius) from now, instead of the globally agreed-upon goal of 1.8 degrees F (1 degree C) Nordhaus has argued that climate change should be considered a "global public good," like public health and international trade, and regulated accordingly, but not through a command-and-control approach. Instead, by agreeing on a global price for burning carbon that reflects its whole cost, this primary cause of rising temperatures could be traded and taxed, putting market forces to work on the problem. Harvard economist Gernot Wagner says that both winners have made huge strides towards tackling climate change. Nordhaus's pioneering cost-benefit models for global warming, and Romer's work on how well-regulated markets can spur technological development and sustainable economic progress, and ultimately faster growth. Paul Romer's website is creaking under the strain! The Nobel Prize committee have created a 'Popular Science' backgrounder, for anyone trying to get up to speed on today's winners. It explains how Bill Nordhaus and Paul Romer developed tools to show how market economy affects nature and knowledge, dating back several decades. Here's a flavour: Nordhaus became the first person to design simple, but dynamic and quantitative models of the global economic-climate system, now called integrated assessment models (IAMs). His tools allow us to simulate how the economy and climate would co-evolve in the future under alternative assumptions about the workings of nature and the market economy, including relevant policies. His models address questions about the desirability of different global scenarios and specific policy interventions. And on market imperfections.. Romer showed that unregulated markets will produce technological change, but tend to underprovide R&D and the new goods created by it. Addressing this under-provision requires well-designed government interventions, such as R&D subsidies and patent regulation. His analysis says that such policies are vital to long-run growth, not just within a country but globally. Nobel laureate Paul Romer has been tweeting. He's flagged up an article explaining why he is optimistic that climate change can be tackled, with firm action. It says: The practical insight is that there are two very different types of optimism. Complacent optimism is the feeling of a child waiting for presents. Conditional optimism is the feeling of a child who is thinking about building a treehouse. "If I get some wood and nails and persuade some other kids to help do the work, we can end up with something really cool." What the theory of endogenous technological progress supports is conditional optimism, not complacent optimism. Instead of suggesting that we can relax because policy choices don't matter, it suggests to the contrary that policy choices are even more important than traditional theory suggests. He's also flagged up a second article, that explains how small changes in economic growth can have a powerful long-term impact. For example: A rough guide to the doubling time for any rate of growth is to divide it into 70. For example, if something grows at 7% per year, you can infer that it doubles every 10 years because 70 / 7 = 10. If it grows at 3.5% per year, it takes 20 years to double. Taking twice as long to double may not sound so bad, but remember the difference between using just the white squares or all the squares on the chessboard. Or consider what happens over the course of a century. A doubling time of 20 years means doubling 5 times in a century, which produces an increase by a factor of 32. Doubling 10 times produces an increase by a factor of 1024. David Pendelbury, scientific manager at Clarivate Analytics (who draw up the list of Nobel frontrunners based on academic citations), agrees that these are worthy winners: "It is a crowning achievement for William D. Nordhaus, Sterling Professor of Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA, and Paul Michael Romer, New York University Stern School of Business, and Hoover Institution, Stanford, California, to be recognized by 2018 Nobel Prize in Economics. We named both as Citation Laureates in 2009 and 2005 respectively, due to an exceptionally high level of citations to their works by the research community. Professor Justin Wolfers of the University of Michigan says Romer and Nordhaus are worthy winners, for asking the 'big questions' about economics and the world we live in. Reaction is starting to flood in. Oxford University researcher Max Roser says Nordhaus and Romer are a great choice: Two researchers who dedicated their lives to study the big transitions in human history by taking a very long run view on how we got to now and where we are heading. Congratulations to both of them. You probably wouldn't put William Nordhaus's climate change work in the same boat as Paul Romer's work on heathy, sustainable economic growth. But the committee at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences insist that these two macroeconomists have more in common than first appears. Committee member Per Krusell, a Swedish macroeconomist, says that both men are really part of the same agenda, thinking about 'long-run, global' issues. Krussell adds that Romer and Nordhaus have a similar view about economic policy, and market failure, even though superficially they may look different. Q: Did you expect to win the award? Apparently not! Paul Romer reveals that he ignored two phone calls today because he assumed they were spam calls. Fortunately the committee got through in the end.... Paul Romer adds that optimism is a vital ingredient to tackling hard problems such as climate change. "One problem today is that people think protecting the environment will be so costly and so hard that they want to ignore the problem and pretend it doesn't exist. Humans are capable of amazing accomplishments if we set our minds to it. Paul Romer is on the phone now, sounding understandably bouncy. Asked about the IPCC's warning on climate change, Romer says that the world can fix the problem, if we start now. He also argues that dire warnings that the future of the planet is in doubt don't help. As Romer puts it: Once we start to try to reduce carbon emissions, we'll be surprised that it wasn't as hard as we anticipated. The danger with very alarming forecasts is that it will make people feel apathetic and hopeless. It is "totally doable", even now, to start bringing down carbon emissions...while also improving standards of living and sustaining growth, Romer says. If we do the right thing, everything can keep going better. but it is time to do the right thing, Romer adds. The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences has decided to award the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2018 to William D. Nordhaus, Yale University, New Haven, USA "for integrating climate change into long-run macroeconomic analysis" and Paul M. Romer, NYU Stern School of Business, New York, USA "for integrating technological innovations into long-run macroeconomic analysis". William D. Nordhaus and Paul M. Romer have designed methods for addressing some of our time's most basic and pressing questions about how we create long-term sustained and sustainable economic growth. At its heart, economics deals with the management of scarce resources. Nature dictates the main constraints on economic growth and our knowledge determines how well we deal with these constraints. This year's Laureates William Nordhaus and Paul Romer have significantly broadened the scope of economic analysis by constructing models that explain how the market economy interacts with nature and knowledge. Technological change - Romer demonstrates how knowledge can function as a driver of long-term economic growth. When annual economic growth of a few per cent accumulates over decades, it transforms people's lives. Previous macroeconomic research had emphasised technological innovation as the primary driver of economic growth, but had not modelled how economic decisions and market conditions determine the creation of new technologies. Paul Romer solved this problem by demonstrating how economic forces govern the willingness of firms to produce new ideas and innovations. Romer's solution, which was published in 1990, laid the foundation of what is now called endogenous growth theory. The theory is both conceptual and practical, as it explains how ideas are different to other goods and require specific conditions to thrive in a market. Romer's theory has generated vast amounts of new research into the regulations and policies that encourage new ideas and long-term prosperity. Climate change - Nordhaus' findings deal with interactions between society and nature. Nordhaus decided to work on this topic in the 1970s, as scientists had become increasingly worried about the combustion of fossil fuel resulting in a warmer climate. In the mid-1990s, he became the first person to create an integrated assessment model, i.e. a quantitative model that describes the global interplay between the economy and the climate. His model integrates theories and empirical results from physics, chemistry and economics. Nordhaus' model is now widely spread and is used to simulate how the economy and the climate co-evolve. It is used to examine the consequences of climate policy interventions, for example carbon taxes. The contributions of Paul Romer and William Nordhaus are methodological, providing us with fundamental insights into the causes and consequences of technological innovation and climate change. This year's Laureates do not deliver conclusive answers, but their findings have brought us considerably closer to answering the question of how we can achieve sustained and sustainable global economic growth. Nordhaus and Romer feel like worthy winners. As mentioned earlier, William Nordhaus has been a pioneer on the vital issue of climate change - using models to show that policymakers are failing to measure the true impact of global warming. Nordhaus's DICE computer model has made a huge difference. It: "integrates in an end-to-end fashion the economics, carbon cycle, climate science, and impacts in a highly aggregated model that allows a weighing of the costs and benefits of taking steps to slow greenhouse warming. That's both important and urgent, on a day when the UN is warning there is just 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe. The Endogenous Growth Theory, meanwhile, shows how growth is generated by internal rather than external factors. That's important - it means that governments can make a real difference to the lives of their people through economic policy - from investment and education to fighting monopolies and protecting IP rights - rather than throwing their hands up and blaming factors beyond their control. Once again, none of the world's leading female economists have been recognised. Commiserations to Esther Duflo, Anne Osborn Krueger, Claudia Goldin, Janet Currie, et al, and good luck for next year. William Nordhaus is being recognised for his work on the damage caused by climate change. Paul Romer has examined how economists can achieve a healthy rate of economic growth. The models that Nordhaus and Romer have created have helped with the development of economic growth, and with combatting climate change, we're hearing. They have taken macroeconomics to a global scale, to tackle some of the world's biggest problems, the Nobel Prize committee say. The winners are William Nordhaus for his work on climate economics, and Paul Romer for his work on the endogenous growth theory. Today's prize is be awarded for innovation, climate and economic growth...... Here we go.... Usually the committee try to contact the winner (s) before the official announcement, so maybe they're struggling to get through. This can be a problem if the prize is going to someone in America, for example, where it's still rather early (approaching 3am in California). Sounds like there's a small delay.... The live feed is now working, so you can hear the scraping of chairs and nervous coughing in the Royal Swedish Academy. (I've embedded it in the top of this blog too). Here are some facts about today's prize: Number of Laureates in Economic Sciences 79 individuals have been awarded 1969-2017 (List of all Laureates in Economic Sciences) Average age The average age of all Laureates* in Economic Sciences between 1969 and 2017 is 67 years. All Nobel Laureates listed by age Youngest Laureate in Economic Sciences To date, the youngest Laureate in Economic Sciences is Kenneth J. Arrow, who was 51 years old when he was awarded in 1972. Oldest Laureate in Economic Sciences The oldest Laureate in Economic Sciences to date is Leonid Hurwicz, who was 90 years old when he was awarded in 2007. He is also the oldest Laureate to be awarded in all Prize categories. Female Laureates in Economic Sciences Elinor Ostrom was the first female Laureate in Economic Sciences. Elinor Ostrom was awarded the Prize in 2009. More here.... Tension is rising in Stockholm as journalists await the news.... As well as the glory, today's winner will also receive a financial windfall of 9 million Swedish kronor. That's roughly £750,000, or $1m. If there are two or three laureates, they share the cash. Just half an hour to go... Those of us who propped up the bottom of the class can take heart from these words from last year's winner, Richard Thaler: This (unscientific) Twitter poll suggests Esther Duflo would be a popular choice, if they're going to double the number of female winners to two. Andreas Wallström of Sweden's Nordea Markets also believes she's in the running.... Her's another prediction, from Francesco Trebbi, professor of economics at the University of British Columbia: The endogenous growth theory argue that most economic growth is generated from within a system as a direct result of internal processes, such as capital investment, investing in human capital, protecting intellectual property rights. US economics professor Tyler Cowen has predicted that it might be Duflo and Banerjee's year..... But given his forecasting record is as bad as mine, that's not a given. Cowen says: I've never once gotten it right, at least not for exact timing, so my apologies to anyone I pick (sorry Bill Baumol!). Nonetheless this year I am in for Esther Duflo and Abihijit Banerjee, possibly with Michael Kremer, for randomized control trials in development economics. Maybe they are too young, as Tim Harford points out, so my back-up pick remains an environmental prize for Bill Nordhaus, Partha Dasgupta, and Marty Weitzman. Perhaps a climate economist, such as William Nordhaus, could win this year's award. Nordhaus, a Yale University professor, has conducted key research into the economics of climate change, showing that mankind is ignoring the catastrophic cost of inaction. His Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy (DICE) model showed the costs and benefits of taking steps to slow greenhouse warming. Shamefully, only one woman has ever won the Nobel prize for economics - Elinor Ostrom back in 2009. That could change today. Esther Duflo, the French-American economist, is in the running for her work on developing economies, including using randomized control trials to discover which anti-poverty initiatives work, and why. Duflo is professor of Poverty Alleviation and Development Economics at MIT. With her partner Abhijit Banerjee, she has argued for a "radical rethinking" of how people in the poorest parts of the world actually live and act. As the FT put it: Duflo and Banerjee are students of detail. Is it better to give people mosquito nets or make them pay? What is the best method of getting children into schools, and ensuring that they learn? Should you encourage immunisation by dispatching clinics to villages or reward parents with bags of rice? Or both? Or neither? Duflo has already won a clutch of awards, including The John Bates Clark Medal (known as the 'mini Nobel'). She's only 45, though, so this year's award could be too soon for her (but you never know...) Another option is Anne Osborn Krueger -- the US economist who coined the term 'rent-seeking' to describe the act of manipulating the social or political environment in which economic activities occur, rather than by creating new wealth. Or how about Harvard economist Claudia Goldin, for her work studying the gender pay gap? She has argued that women are paid less than men because they seek jobs with more flexible hours or remote-work options, and in some professions there is a high penalty for taking any time out of the labour market. Or Princeton's Janet Currie? She's an expert on healthcare issues such as early intervention programs, programs to expand health insurance and improve health care, public housing, and food and nutrition programs. Predicting Nobel winners is a tricky task, but that's no reason not to give it a go. Every year, researchers at Clarivate Analytics chew their way though the Web of Science citation index to calculate whose work has been cited particularly often, making them good candidates for a Nobel. Here are their top predictions for this year: Manuel Arellano, CEMFI, Madrid, Spain, and Stephen R. Bond, Oxford University, UK, for contributions to panel data analysis, especially the Arellano-Bond estimator. This method exploits time patterns in panel data to estimate the economic response to a change in a policy or other variable, while controlling for permanent unobserved confounding variation. Wesley M. Cohen, Duke University, Durham, NC, and Daniel A. Levinthal, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, for their introduction and development of the concept of absorptive capacity (i.e., the ability of firms to evaluate, assimilate, and apply external knowledge) and its contribution to advancing our understanding of the innovative performance of firms, industries and nations. David M. Kreps, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, for contributions to dynamic economic phenomena, in choice theory, finance, game theory, and organization theory. Good morning. Top economists across the globe will be watching their phones nervously today, or setting their alarm clocks a little earlier than usual. Because, around 10.45am UK time, someone's going to win the biggest prize in economics science. The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences isn't one of the original ones, of course. The money doesn't come from the Nobel family profits from armaments trade, nor is it one of the original awards endowed by Alfred Nobel. Instead, it's the creation of the Swedish central bank, designed to bring some glamour and recognition to the oft-criticised sphere of economics. So, anyone complaining that it's 'not a real Nobel' can stay behind after class and clean the erasers. The prize has recognised some of the biggest names and brightest ideas, since Ragnar Frisch and Jan Tinbergen shared the first award in 1969. Since then, John Hicks, Friedrich Hayek, James Tobin, John Nash, Joe Stiglitz and Paul Krugman have all received that precious phone call from Sweden. Last year the prize went to U.S. academic Richard Thaler, who helped popularise the idea of "nudging" people towards doing what was best for them. Other recent winners include Angus Deaton, for his work on inequality, and Jean Tirole for his analysis of monopolies and how to fight them. Personally, I've never quite got over 2013, when Eugene Fama (father of the efficient market hypothesis) shared the award with Robert Shiller (who proved that markets aren't very efficient after all). This year's winner, or winners, will be announced sometime after 10.45am UK time (11.45am in Stockholm). 25394 false false      The press conference at the The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm to announce today's winners.        French economist Esther Duflo     

Load-Date: October 8, 2018


End of Document




Nine ways to improve nutrition and tackle climate change; How should we deal with the serious threat climate change poses to nutrition and food security? Our panel of experts have their say
The Guardian
December 2, 2015 Wednesday 12:17 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONALS NETWORK
Length: 992 words
Byline: Holly Young
Body


1. Focus on sustainable diets
From a consumption perspective we've been working for several years on a project called LiveWell through which we've shown that diets that are good for health are also good for the environment and are affordable. In the developed world, without wanting to simplify things too much, this means reducing meat consumption and eating more plant based foods. We're starting to see this message gain more traction. In the UK, we have a plant-based coalition of corporate, NGO and academic partners led by Alpro and supported by WWF that aims to raise awareness of sustainable diets and the benefits of plant-based eating. Nick Hughes, food sustainability advisor, WWF-UK, London, UK.
 Related:  Breakfast around the world - gallery
2. Integrate climate change and nutrition policies
Climate change and nutrition need to have an aligned agenda. We know crop prices will increase (it has been predicted that climate change will result in additional prices increase of 5 -25% for important agriculture crops like maize, wheat and soybeans), we also know that food quality is and will continue to be affected, so collaboration is called for to take a number of factors more seriously such as seasonality, effects of diet on greenhouse emissions, and rapid urbanisation (to name a mere few). While climate change needs to be built into national policies on the global stage, we need to work in countries and lead on the formation of nutrition alliances to identify opportunities for action. Dominic Schofield, president, GAIN Canada, Ottawa, Canada.  @dschofieldGAIN
3. Empower women
Small scale farmers produce about 80% of the food in Africa and the majority of small scale farmers in sub-Saharan Africa are women. Unfortunately women are most affected by climate change damage. Women farmers often use agro-ecological type of farming which involve climate-smart practices. So empowerment of women should be seen as one intervention to address climate change.  Anna Lartey, director of nutrition, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.
4. Listen to indigenous communities
Here at IFAD we believe it's also important to remember the value of indigenous knowledge related to climate change adaptation. This includes identification of under-utilised varieties (often now known only by elderly members of indigenous communities) as well as varieties that have higher micronutrient values and that, with change in climate, have the potential to be grown at higher altitudes. Seán Kennedy, senior technical specialist on public health and nutrition, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome, Italy. @IFADnews
5. Fix our broken food systems
One third of food is lost/wasted before it makes it to the table. I think we do talk about these issues and they are reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals, but I think we have to stop talking about them as separate issues. Quite frankly, if we are going to build resilient food systems that meet food and nutrition needs, we must fix what is currently broken and then fill the gap, versus simply saying we have to produce more to feed more across the board. The latter is a recipe for disaster. Nabeeha M. Kazi, president and CEO of Humanitas Global and chair of the Community for Zero Hunger, Washington, DC. @nabeehakazi
 Related:  Family dinner time around the world - in pictures
6. Don't forget the economic case
We have to make the economic case. Disasters cost the global economy $38 trillion between 1980 and 2012. Some 87% of these reported disasters (18,200 events), 74% of losses (US$2,800 billion) and 61% of lives lost (1.4 million in total) were caused by weather extremes. 
Compare that with WFP's Cost of Hunger study results which show that 1 dollar invested in nutrition yields 16 times the benefit. With that return on investment, it's clear that nutrition and food security need to be priority investment areas for climate finance.  Richard Choularton, chief, climate and disaster risk reduction programmes, World Food Programme (WFP), Stowe, USA. @rchoularton
7. Ensure the Paris Agreement accelerates progress
The Paris Agreement needs to accelerate efforts to bolster local, national and global capacity to manage the impacts of climate extremes and slow on-set climate change through comprehensive risk management approaches. This includes strengthening local and national disaster management capacities to prepare for, respond to, and recover from climate disasters . Richard Choularton, chief, climate and disaster risk reduction programmes, World Food Programme (WFP), Stowe, USA. @rchoularton
8. We need to get better at producing and sharing food
We need to stop calling all the time for yield increase. We know that sustainable agri-models like agro-ecology are able to feed the world. Agro-ecology - maintained by two billion farmers - is based on local knowledge and know-hows and land. It is one of the most reliable solutions to ensure food and nutrition security for all. It also contributes to improving smallholders farmers' yield and income, developing a fossil-free, independent and sustainable agriculture, improving farmers' resilience to climate change and meeting the challenges of climate adaptation and mitigation. Peggy Pascal, food security advocacy officer, Action Against Hunger, Paris, France. @PascalPeggy
9. Encourage more collaboration
Collaboration is certainly necessary, but there is not enough of it. There seems to be increasing acknowledgement and dialogue among the academic and technical communities about the interplay between climate change, food security, nutrition and gender, but this is less evident on the ground in programmatic design. I think that much of what is happening is reactive. Dominic Schofield 
Real the full Q&A here. 
                                            Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter.                   

Load-Date: December 2, 2015


End of Document




Australia, your country is burning - dangerous climate change is here with you now; I am a climate scientist on holiday in the Blue Mountains, watching climate change in action
The Guardian(London)
January 1, 2020 Wednesday 7:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:1
Length: 782 words
Byline: Michael Mann
Body


After years studying the climate, my work has brought me to Sydney where I'm studying the linkages between climate change and extreme weather events.
Prior to beginning my sabbatical stay in Sydney, I took the opportunity this holiday season to vacation in Australia with my family. We went to see the Great Barrier Reef - one of the great wonders of this planet - while we still can. Subject to the twin assaults of warming-caused bleaching and ocean acidification, it will be gone in a matter of decades            in the absence of a dramatic reduction in global carbon emissions.
We also travelled to the Blue Mountains, another of Australia's natural wonders, known for its lush temperate rainforests, majestic cliffs and rock formations and panoramic vistas that challenge any the world has to offer. It too is now threatened by climate change.
I witnessed this firsthand.
I did not see vast expanses of rainforest framed by distant blue-tinged mountain ranges. Instead I looked out into smoke-filled valleys, with only the faintest ghosts of distant ridges and peaks in the background. The iconic blue tint (which derives from a haze formed from "terpenes" emitted by the Eucalyptus trees that are so plentiful here) was replaced by a brown haze. The blue sky, too, had been replaced by that brown haze.
The locals, whom I found to be friendly and outgoing, would volunteer that they have never seen anything like this before. Some even uttered the words "climate change" without any prompting.
The songs of Peter Garrett and Midnight Oil I first enjoyed decades ago have taken on a whole new meaning for me now. They seem disturbingly prescient in light of what we are witnessing unfold in Australia.
The brown skies I observed in the Blue Mountains this week are a product of human-caused climate change. Take record heat, combine it with unprecedented            drought in already dry regions and you get unprecedented bushfires like the ones engulfing the            Blue Mountains and spreading            across the continent. It's not complicated.
 The smoke is so thick in Katoomba tourists are opting for photos with billboards, rather than the Three Sisters themselves. @abcsydney           pic.twitter.com/MOWvhlUBgs - Tom Lowrey (@tomlowrey)            December 30, 2019
The warming of our planet - and the changes in climate associated with it - are due to the fossil fuels we're burning: oil, whether at midnight or any other hour of the day, natural gas, and the biggest culprit of all, coal. That's not complicated either.
When we mine for coal, like the controversial planned Adani coalmine, which would more than double Australia's coal-based carbon emissions, we are literally mining away at our blue skies. The Adani coalmine could rightly be renamed the Blue Sky mine.
 In Australia, beds are burning. So are entire towns, irreplaceable forests and endangered and precious animal species such as the koala (arguably the world's only living plush toy) are perishing            in massive numbers due to the unprecedented bushfires.
The continent of Australia is figuratively - and in some sense literally - on fire.
Yet the prime minister, Scott Morrison, appears remarkably indifferent to the climate emergency Australia is suffering through, having chosen to vacation in Hawaii as Australians are left to contend with unprecedented heat and bushfires.
Morrison has shown himself to be beholden to coal interests and his administration is considered to have conspired with a small number of petrostates            to sabotage the recent            UN climate conference in Madrid ("COP25"), seen as a last ditch effort to keep planetary warming below a level (1.5C) considered by many to constitute            "dangerous" planetary warming.
But Australians need only wake up in the morning, turn on the television, read the newspaper or look out the window to see what is increasingly obvious to many - for Australia, dangerous climate change is already here. It's simply a matter of how much worse we're willing to allow it to get.
Australia is experiencing a climate emergency. It is literally burning. It needs leadership that is able to recognise that and act. And it needs voters to hold politicians accountable at the ballot box.
Australians must vote out fossil-fuelled politicians who have chosen to be part of the problem and vote in climate champions who are willing to solve it.
    • Michael E Mann is distinguished professor of atmospheric science at Pennsylvania State University. His most recent book, with Tom Toles, is The Madhouse Effect : How Climate Change Denial Is Threatening Our Planet, Destroying Our Politics, and Driving Us Crazy (Columbia University Press, 2016).

Load-Date: January 1, 2020


End of Document




How Leonardo DiCaprio became one of the world's top climate change champions; The Oscar-winning actor's environmental activism may not quite stretch back to What's Eating Gilbert Grape but he has steadily schooled himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s
The Guardian
March 1, 2016 Tuesday 12:08 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1035 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg
Body


Leonardo DiCaprio was a climate champion long before the actor wrapped himself in an animal carcass, vomited up raw bison liver, and risked hypothermia for his Oscar-winning role in Revenant.
DiCaprio used his acceptance speech for best actor to urge a global audience to reject the "politics of greed", and support leaders willing to take action against climate change. 
"Climate change is real, it is happening right now, it is the most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating," the actor said.
The Oscars was probably the biggest audience to date for DiCaprio's activism - but campaigners who have worked with the actor said he has been steeped in the issue for years, and is desperate about the need for action.
Over the last few years, DiCaprio has steadily donated his celebrity - and at least $30m in funding according to his foundation - to help advance the United Nations climate negotiations, protect coral reefs and tigers, and spread public awareness about the dangers of climate change. 
The actor has become a fixture at events focused on global challenges since 2014, dropping in at the Davos economic forum to pick up an award last January, and holding a private chat on the sidelines with Ban Ki-Moon, the United Nations secretary general, on the sidelines of the Paris climate negotiations last December.
                     DiCaprio marched with 400,000 through the streets of Manhattan and addressed the United Nations about the dangers of climate change in 2014, and has had private tutorials in climate science from some of the world's best researchers.
Other actors - notably Mark Ruffalo, the best supporting actor nominee on Sunday - are avowed climate campaigners, and other wealthy individuals give to environmental causes. But DiCaprio operates at a different level of fame, campaigners said.
"There are many foundations and non-governmental organisations interested in oceans and many do great work. He has a megaphone that nobody else on the planet has. He is so respected and admired and influential all around the world from the general public to head of state, so when he says something people listen," said Enric Sala, explorer-in-residence for National Geographic, who has worked with DiCaprio. 
Those efforts by the Tesla-owning, scuba-diving actor have now displaced earlier public perceptions of DiCaprio as a player who surrounded himself with a succession of models - and it's been helpful for the cause.
"People like Leonardo DiCaprio have such access to people, it is amazing. When people hear him talk so forcefully and clearly about a particular issue than people listen," said Janos Pasztor, who advised Ban on climate change. "I am very glad that he did that." 
DiCaprio's environmental activism may not stretch back quite as far as the first of his six Oscar nominations - that was in 1993 for What's Eating Gilbert Grape - but the actor has been steadily schooling himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s, campaigners said. 
By his own account, DiCaprio began worrying about biodiversity and species loss as an infant. He has told interviewers his parents hung a reproduction of Bosch's Garden of Earthly Delights above his crib in their Los Angeles home - and he was disturbed by the depiction of the loss of Eden.
One key moment in the evolution of DiCaprio as a climate champion was a meeting with then vice-president Al Gore at the White House in 1998. DiCaprio, who has cited that meeting as the beginning of his climate activism, set up his foundation that same year.
Campaigners who have worked with the actor said he he steeps himself in the material - reading, keeping staff on hand who can brief him on climate science and policy, and travelling to locations that are on the frontline of climate change. 
A decade or so after the White House meeting with Gore, the two met by chance in first class on a flight to Europe. "Leo talked to Al the whole flight over, he picked Al's brain the entire night, and it was a red eye," said Kailee Kreider, who was the working for Gore. "The two of them talked all night. That is pretty unusual."
The actor has stayed in regular contact with noted researchers - such as Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University. "I have talked with him and his folks frequently over the phone," Mann said in an email. The actor and the climate scientist met for the first time last October in a bar in New York's west village.
"The meeting lasted a couple hours, and touched on all aspects of the science of climate change, the impacts, and the solutions. I was truly impressed by Leo. He follows the issue closely, reads up about it quite a bit, (including pieces in the Guardian, I'm quite sure!), and he understands the nuances of the issues involved. His questions for me were all thoughtful and insightful. There is a lot of depth there, and I think that Leo really approaches the issue with both his heart and his head," Mann said. 
"One thing that came across was a pessimism, that I find in many folks, that we will garner the will to confront this problem in time. I tried to convey, as a scientist, why it is that I am still cautiously optimistic that we will indeed rise to the occasion in time."
DiCaprio's brand of climate activism at first involved performance - such as narrating a climate change film, the 11th Hour, in 2007. But over the last few years he has increasingly used his fortune and his foundation to support conservation efforts. 
DiCaprio's foundation donated $3m in 2014 to stop overfishing, $3m to protect tigers in Nepal, and funding Sala's initiative to create marine reserves in the Pacific. 
The actor is currently at work on a climate change documentary that took him to Baffin Island in the Arctic last summer - and by DiCaprio's own account that is highly unlikely to be the end of his activism.
"I am consumed by this," DiCaprio told Rolling Stone last January. "There isn't a couple of hours a day where I'm not thinking about it. It's this slow burn. It's not 'aliens invading our planet next week and we have to get up and fight to defend our country,' but it's this inevitable thing, and it's so terrifying."

Load-Date: March 1, 2016


End of Document




How Leonardo DiCaprio became one of the world's top climate change champions; The Oscar-winning actor's environmental activism may not quite stretch back to What's Eating Gilbert Grape but he has steadily schooled himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s
The Guardian
February 29, 2016 Monday 7:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1036 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg
Body


Leonardo DiCaprio was a climate champion long before the actor wrapped himself in an animal carcass, vomited up raw bison liver, and risked hypothermia for his Oscar-winning role in Revenant.
DiCaprio used his acceptance speech for best actor to urge a global audience to reject the "politics of greed", and support leaders willing to take action against climate change. 
"Climate change is real, it is happening right now, it is the most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating," the actor said.
The Oscars was probably the biggest audience to date for DiCaprio's activism - but campaigners who have worked with the actor said he has been steeped in the issue for years, and is desperate about the need for action.
Over the last few years, DiCaprio has steadily donated his celebrity - and at least $30m in funding according to his foundation - to help advance the United Nations climate negotiations, protect coral reefs and tigers, and spread public awareness about the dangers of climate change. 
The actor has become a fixture at events focused on global challenges since 2014, dropping in at the Davos economic forum to pick up an award last January, and holding a private chat on the sidelines with Ban Ki-Moon, the United Nations secretary general, on the sidelines of the Paris climate negotiations last December.
                     DiCaprio marched with 400,000 through the streets of Manhattan and addressed the United Nations about the dangers of climate change in 2014, and has had private tutorials in climate science from some of the world's best researchers.
Other actors - notably Mark Ruffalo, the best supporting actor nominee on Sunday - are avowed climate campaigners, and other wealthy individuals give to environmental causes. But Leo DiCaprio operates at a different level of fame, campaigners said.
"There are many foundations and non-governmental organisations interested in oceans and many do great work. He has a megaphone that nobody else on the planet has. He is so respected and admired and influential all around the world from the general public to head of state, so when he says something people listen," said Enric Sala, explorer-in-residence for National Geographic, who has worked with DiCaprio. 
Those efforts by the Tesla-owning, scuba-diving actor have now displaced earlier public perceptions of DiCaprio as a player who surrounded himself with a succession of models - and it's been helpful for the cause.
"People like Leonardo DiCaprio have such access to people, it is amazing. When people hear him talk so forcefully and clearly about a particular issue than people listen," said Janos Pasztor, who advised Ban on climate change. "I am very glad that he did that." 
DiCaprio's environmental activism may not stretch back quite as far as the first of his six Oscar nominations - that was in 1993 for What's Eating Gilbert Grape - but the actor has been steadily schooling himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s, campaigners said. 
By his own account, DiCaprio began worrying about biodiversity and species loss as an infant. He has told interviewers his parents hung a reproduction of Bosch's Garden of Earthly Delights above his crib in their Los Angeles home - and he was disturbed by the depiction of the loss of Eden.
One key moment in the evolution of DiCaprio as a climate champion was a meeting with then vice-president Al Gore at the White House in 1998. DiCaprio, who has cited that meeting as the beginning of his climate activism, set up his foundation that same year.
Campaigners who have worked with the actor said he he steeps himself in the material - reading, keeping staff on hand who can brief him on climate science and policy, and travelling to locations that are on the frontline of climate change. 
A decade or so after the White House meeting with Gore, the two met by chance in first class on a flight to Europe. "Leo talked to Al the whole flight over, he picked Al's brain the entire night, and it was a red eye," said Kailee Kreider, who was the working for Gore. "The two of them talked all night. That is pretty unusual."
The actor has stayed in regular contact with noted researchers - such as Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University. "I have talked with him and his folks frequently over the phone," Mann said in an email. The actor and the climate scientist met for the first time last October in a bar in New York's west village.
"The meeting lasted a couple hours, and touched on all aspects of the science of climate change, the impacts, and the solutions. I was truly impressed by Leo. He follows the issue closely, reads up about it quite a bit, (including pieces in the Guardian, I'm quite sure!), and he understands the nuances of the issues involved. His questions for me were all thoughtful and insightful. There is a lot of depth there, and I think that Leo really approaches the issue with both his heart and his head," Mann said. 
"One thing that came across was a pessimism, that I find in many folks, that we will garner the will to confront this problem in time. I tried to convey, as a scientist, why it is that I am still cautiously optimistic that we will indeed rise to the occasion in time."
DiCaprio's brand of climate activism at first involved performance - such as narrating a climate change film, the 11th Hour, in 2007. But over the last few years he has increasingly used his fortune and his foundation to support conservation efforts. 
DiCaprio's foundation donated $3m in 2014 to stop overfishing, $3m to protect tigers in Nepal, and funding Sala's initiative to create marine reserves in the Pacific. 
The actor is currently at work on a climate change documentary that took him to Baffin Island in the Arctic last summer - and by DiCaprio's own account that is highly unlikely to be the end of his activism.
"I am consumed by this," DiCaprio told Rolling Stone last January. "There isn't a couple of hours a day where I'm not thinking about it. It's this slow burn. It's not 'aliens invading our planet next week and we have to get up and fight to defend our country,' but it's this inevitable thing, and it's so terrifying."

Load-Date: February 29, 2016


End of Document




How Leonardo DiCaprio became one of the world's top climate change champions; The Oscar-winning actor's environmental activism may not quite stretch back What's Eating Gilbert Grape but he has steadily schooling himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s
The Guardian
February 29, 2016 Monday 5:17 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1035 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg
Body


Leonardo DiCaprio was a climate champion long before the actor wrapped himself in an animal carcass, vomited up raw bison liver, and risked hypothermia for his Oscar-winning role in Revenant.
DiCaprio used his acceptance speech for best actor to urge a global audience to reject the "politics of greed", and support leaders willing to take action against climate change. 
"Climate change is real, it is happening right now, it is the most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating," the actor said.
The Oscars was probably the biggest audience to date for DiCaprio's activism - but campaigners who have worked with the actor said he has been steeped in the issue for years, and is desperate about the need for action.
Over the last few years, DiCaprio has steadily donated his celebrity - and at least $30m in funding according to his foundation - to help advance the United Nations climate negotiations, protect coral reefs and tigers, and spread public awareness about the dangers of climate change. 
The actor has become a fixture at events focused on global challenges since 2014, dropping in at the Davos economic forum to pick up an award last January, and holding a private chat on the sidelines with Ban Ki-Moon, the United Nations secretary general, on the sidelines of the Paris climate negotiations last December.
                     DiCaprio marched with 400,000 through the streets of Manhattan and addressed the United Nations about the dangers of climate change in 2014, and has had private tutorials in climate science from some of the world's best researchers.
Other actors - notably Mark Ruffalo, the best supporting actor nominee on Sunday - are avowed climate campaigners, and other wealthy individuals give to environmental causes. But Leo DiCaprio operates at a different level of fame, campaigners said.
"There are many foundations and non-governmental organisations interested in oceans and many do great work. He has a megaphone that nobody else on the planet has. He is so respected and admired and influential all around the world from the general public to head of state, so when he says something people listen," said Enric Sala, explorer-in-residence for National Geographic, who has worked with DiCaprio. 
Those efforts by the Tesla-owning, scuba-diving actor have now displaced earlier public perceptions of DiCaprio as a player who surrounded himself with a succession of models - and it's been helpful for the cause.
"People like Leonardo DiCaprio have such access to people, it is amazing. When people hear him talk so forcefully and clearly about a particular issue than people listen," said Janos Pasztor, who advised Ban on climate change. "I am very glad that he did that." 
DiCaprio's environmental activism may not stretch back quite as far as the first of his six Oscar nominations - that was in 1993 for What's Eating Gilbert Grape - but the actor has been steadily schooling himself on the oceans and climate change since the 1990s, campaigners said. 
By his own account, DiCaprio began worrying about biodiversity and species loss as an infant. He has told interviewers his parents hung a reproduction of Bosch's Garden of Earthly Delights above his crib in their Los Angeles home - and he was disturbed by the depiction of the loss of Eden.
One key moment in the evolution of DiCaprio as a climate champion was a meeting with then vice-president Al Gore at the White House in 1998. DiCaprio, who has cited that meeting as the beginning of his climate activism, set up his foundation that same year.
Campaigners who have worked with the actor said he he steeps himself in the material - reading, keeping staff on hand who can brief him on climate science and policy, and travelling to locations that are on the frontline of climate change. 
A decade or so after the White House meeting with Gore, the two met by chance in first class on a flight to Europe. "Leo talked to Al the whole flight over, he picked Al's brain the entire night, and it was a red eye," said Kailee Kreider, who was the working for Gore. "The two of them talked all night. That is pretty unusual."
The actor has stayed in regular contact with noted researchers - such as Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University. "I have talked with him and his folks frequently over the phone," Mann said in an email. The actor and the climate scientist met for the first time last October in a bar in New York's west village.
"The meeting lasted a couple hours, and touched on all aspects of the science of climate change, the impacts, and the solutions. I was truly impressed by Leo. He follows the issue closely, reads up about it quite a bit, (including pieces in the Guardian, I'm quite sure!), and he understands the nuances of the issues involved. His questions for me were all thoughtful and insightful. There is a lot of depth there, and I think that Leo really approaches the issue with both his heart and his head," Mann said. 
"One thing that came across was a pessimism, that I find in my folks, that we will garner the will to confront this problem in time. I tried to convey, as a scientist, why it is that I am still cautiously optimistic that we will indeed rise to the occasion in time."
DiCaprio's brand of climate activism at first involved performance - such as narrating a climate change film, the 11th Hour, in 2007. But over the last few years he has increasingly used his fortune and his foundation to support conservation efforts. 
DiCaprio's foundation donated $3m in 2014 to stop overfishing, $3m to protect tigers in Nepal, and funding Sala's initiative to create marine reserves in the Pacific. 
The actor is currently at work on a climate change documentary that took him to Baffin Island in the Arctic last summer - and by DiCaprio's own account that is highly unlikely to be the end of his activism.
"I am consumed by this," DiCaprio told Rolling Stone last January. "There isn't a couple of hours a day where I'm not thinking about it. It's this slow burn. It's not 'aliens invading our planet next week and we have to get up and fight to defend our country,' but it's this inevitable thing, and it's so terrifying."

Load-Date: February 29, 2016


End of Document




Climate change and other human activities are affecting species migration; Humans have an impact on species migration both through climate change and by changing the landscape.
The Guardian
September 8, 2016 Thursday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 687 words
Byline: John Abraham
Body


One of the reasons climate change is such an important topic is that it will affect (and already is affecting) the natural biological systems. Both plants and animals will have to respond to the changing climate. In some cases, this means adapting to higher temperatures. In other cases, the changes may be alterations in the precipitation, length of growing season, availability or resources, or other influences. 
While some animals can adapt, others will have to migrate. Obviously migration can be apparent in mobile animals that will move to maintain a more or less similar climate to that to which they are accustomed.
But animal and plant movement does not occur in just a changing climate. It also has to navigate changes to the landscape that humans create. For instance, increased land allocation to agriculture or urbanization can create barriers for free migration. So, what scientists really want to know is how these two factors (climate change and land use change) will collectively affect the patterns of animal and plant movement.
A study that actually was published a few years ago but is only now getting press looked at this issue. The publication was authored by Julian Olden and his colleagues from the University of Washington and the Nature Conservancy. What they researchers found was very interesting. The study was published in the journal Ecology Letters and is titled Projected Climate-Driven Faunal Movement Routes. 
First, they projected changes in the distribution of climatically suitable zones for projected future climates. They considered nearly 3,000 vertebrate species. Using a computer model, the projected how and when the species would migrate and they tracked the migration routes. The study incorporated a resistance to movement based on the amount of human alteration to the landscape. The analysis was similar to how the flow of electrons through a wire circuit is calculated. In fact, electronic circuit theory formed a basis for the calculations. 
From their analysis, the authors identified several locations in North and South America that will be crucial for species movement in a changing climate. Large movements are expected in the southeastern US, the Amazon region, and parts of Brazil. Some of the areas where migration is expected have intact biological regions. Others, in particular the southeastern US and Brazil, have pathways that are heavily impacted by human activities, which may create a barrier to the migration routes.
In the study, the team of scientists first identified what they term "climatically suitable" conditions for each of the species under a changing climate scenario. They plotted routes for the species from areas that were projected to be unsuitable to these suitable areas. The routes were plotted so that they avoided the most heavily human-impacted regions. They then plotted the paths on a map for easy of visualization.
Some concrete and specific examples were provided. For instance, in the southeastern US, species are projected to move northward into the southern Appalachian Mountains. In South America, species are expected to migrate from central Argentina in the Pampas, Sierras de Cordoba, and Andes. The authors identified 14 biological regions and calculated the average direction of movement across each biome. Great visualizations are shown of paths of migrations, for instance, in the southeastern USA.
I wrote to Dr. Olden and he replied:
                       Facilitating species movements by increasing connectivity is perhaps the most often-cited adaptation strategies for conserving biodiversity in a changing climate. Our work identifies critical dispersal conduits for thousands of vertebrate species, and highlights how human activities on the landscape have the potential to greatly promote or inhibit these movements.                     
This is another one of those exciting papers that doesn't look at the basic physics of climate change. That topic is really settled and the science is on the edges of how fast climate change will occur. Rather this study helps us assess what the impacts of climate change will be.

Load-Date: September 8, 2016


End of Document




Water world: rising tides close in on Trump, the climate change denier; Climate change has barely registered as a 2016 campaign issue, but in Florida, the state which usually decides the presidential election, the waters are lapping at the doors of Donald Trump's real estate empire
The Guardian
July 6, 2016 Wednesday 12:01 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS
Length: 1866 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg
Body


On a hot and lazy afternoon in Palm Beach, the only sign of movement is the water gently lapping at the grounds of Mar-a-Lago, the private club that is the prize of Donald Trump's real estate acquisitions in Florida. 
Trump currently dismisses climate change as a hoax invented by China, though he has quietly sought to shield real estate investments in Ireland from its effects.
But at the Republican presidential contender's Palm Beach estate and the other properties that bear his name in south Florida, the water is already creeping up bridges and advancing on access roads, lawns and beaches because of sea-level rise, according to a risk analysis prepared for the Guardian. 
In 30 years, the grounds of Mar-a-Lago could be under at least a foot of water for 210 days a year because of tidal flooding along the intracoastal water way, with the water rising past some of the cottages and bungalows, the analysis by Coastal Risk Consulting found. 
Trump's insouciance in the face of overwhelming scientific evidence of climate change - even lapping up on his own doorstep - makes him something of an outlier in south Florida, where mayors are actively preparing for a future under climate change. 
Trump, who backed climate action in 2009 but now describes climate change as "bullshit", is also out of step with the US and other governments' efforts to turn emissions-cutting pledges into concrete actions in the wake of the Paris climate agreement. Trump has threatened to pull the US out of the agreement.
And the presidential contender's posturing about climate denial may further alienate the Republican candidate from younger voters and minority voters in this election who see climate change as a gathering danger.
When Guardian US asked its readers about their most urgent concern in these elections as part of our Voices of America series, the single issue looming on their minds was climate change.
Real estate professionals, with perhaps an extra dash of self-interest, hold similar views. In a survey published in the Miami Herald last month, two-thirds of high-end Miami realtors were concerned sea-level rise and climate change could hurt local property values, up from 56% of them last year. 
So too for mayors in south Florida. About a third of the civic leaders in south Florida's compact of mayors are working on strategies to protect their towns from rising seas - and lobbying Florida's governor and fellow Republicans in Congress to acknowledge the gathering threat. 
Elected officials in those same Florida towns say they are already spending heavily to rebuild disappearing beaches and pump out water-logged streets.
 Republicans in coastal districts can't afford to play politics with climate change, said Steve Abrams, a Republican and mayor of Palm Beach County. 
"We don't have the luxury at the local level to engage in these lofty policy debates," said Abrams. "I have been in knee-deep water in many parts of my district during King Tide."
King Tides, the extreme high tides of the autumn, are a growing nuisance in Miami and other areas of south Florida - and are creeping up the manicured lawns of Trump's Mar-a-Lago from the intracoastal waterway, according to the CRC analysis.
Parts of the estate are already at high risk of flooding under heavy rains and storms, the analysis found. By 2045, the storm surge from even a category two storm would bring waters crashing over the main swimming pool and up to the main building, the analysis found.
The historic mansion at the heart of Mar-a-Lago is not going to be underwater, "but they are going to have more and more issues with health and safety, access, and infrastructure," said Keren Bolter, chief scientist for the firm.
 Despite Trump's pronouncements, there is strong evidence that he - personally - could pay the price for climate change in his property interests along the south Florida oceanfront and intracoastal waterway.
In south Florida, sea level is projected to rise up to 34in by the middle of the century and as high as 81in by 2100, according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration.
South of Mar-a-Lago, where the elevation is lower, water already pools in the road in front of the Trump Hollywood condos after the briefest of cloud bursts. The luxury development, where three-bedroom units are on sale for up to $3m apiece, offers "pristine beaches". 
"Right outside your door you'll find the Hollywood Beach broadwalk, ranked as one of the five best boardwalks in the country," the company website says.
But Peter Bober, a Hollywood native who is now the city's mayor, said flooding was becoming a regular occurrence, when storms coincided with high tide. 
"We have had neighbourhoods where the water has been up to people's front doors. That is not something that I remember as a kid growing up in the city of Hollywood," he said. 
Meanwhile, the city is spending heavily on pumping systems and to truck in sand to replenish beaches disappearing due to erosion.
Bober said he had seen storms with water pouring over the sea walls of the intracoastal. "Water just floods the entire neighbourhood, and there is nothing we can do about it," Bober said. "We have occasional storms where we are totally overwhelmed."
Such instances are only growing more frequent. Bolter's modelling suggests Trump's Hollywood condos could be turned into islands for up to 140 days a year by 2045, cut off from the low-lying A1A coastal road because of tidal flooding and storm surges. Under a category two storm, a storm surge could wash right up to the front gate.
Further south, the Trump Grande in Sunny Isles also faces a soggy future, according to the projections. In 30 years, the boundaries of the property could face tidal flooding and storm surges for 97 days a year, cutting off access to the A1A road. The beaches could also be scoured away by erosion. 
"The big issue here is that if a big storm hits, you have 5ft, 6ft waves, and that is going to eat away even at the grass here. It could push the waves even to where we are standing, And if that is going to eat away this whole area, that could do some serious damage," Bolter said.
Other Trump-branded properties, such as the golf clubs in Doral and Jupiter, are at higher elevations, above the water line amid projected sea-level rise this century. But Bolter said the courses faced different risks from heavy rainfall and poor drainage because of Florida's high water table. 
Scientists have long expected sea level rise on the south-east Florida coast to occur faster than the global average, advancing rapidly on barrier islands and beaches.
The low-lying coastal areas are exposed to an additional threat of inland flooding, from the intercoastal waterways, and contamination of fresh water supply by high tides and storm surges.
But the pace of sea-level rise has accelerated over the last decade because of the collapse of ice cover in Greenland and Antarctica, and because of the weakening of ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream. Nowhere is this as evident as in south Florida. 
Since 2006, the average rate of sea-level rise in south Florida has  increased to 9mm a year from 3mm a year, for a total rise over the decade of about 90mm, or about 3.5in, according to Shimon Wdowinski, a research scientist at the University of Miami. 
As a result, flooding in Miami Beach and other low-lying areas has doubled over the last decade, Wdowinski found, using tide gauges, rain records, insurance claims and other data to construct the flood record. "People should be aware of where they want to invest for their properties," he said. "I think for the next 20 years it will be OK, but I don't know if it will be in 50 or 80 years. That's a different story."
Other sections of the low-lying south Florida coast are just as vulnerable. In 2012, Hurricane Sandy barely grazed Florida, reserving its fury for New York and New Jersey.
But a subsequent storm unleashed huge waves that uprooted traffic lights and street signs, and caused the collapse of a 1.5-mile stretch of the A1A coastal artery in the center of Fort Lauderdale. 
 "When the road collapsed, that was basically a huge wake-up call," said Jason Liechty, environmental projects coordinator for Broward County. "Sometimes when you talk about climate change and sea-level rise it seems very abstract, but if you see big chunks of concrete just sticking up out of the road, it becomes very real.
"It took $20m and 40,000 truckloads of imported sand so far to raise the mile-long section of road by 2ft, sink in metal sheets 40ft down, and rebuild sand dunes to provide buffers from future storms - and the repairs are still under way four years later. 
"So let's do the math here: you are talking about several hundred million dollars if the whole coast line is affected, and that's a lot of money," Liechty said. 
A number of towns in south Florida are already beginning to make the investment, calculating that it would be cheaper to put in defences against rising seas now than wait for a catastrophe.
Miami Beach is spending $400m to raise roads and install pumps to drain streets that experience regularly flooding at high-tide - and to prevent salt water from contaminating fresh water storage inland.  
In other sea level hotspots, such as Hollywood, newer construction - including Trump-branded buildings - are being built on top of steeply graded driveways, above the flood zone. 
But for some of south Florida's cities, there may be no alternative to retreat - even if it means abandoning some of the wealthiest real estate in the country.
In his offices in the historic city hall of Coral Gables, James Cason keeps a poster-size map showing a wide swathe of land, sliced up by canals, yacht moorings and multimillion dollar homes in gated communities with elevations below 4ft.
About 34 miles of Coral Gables are exposed to the ocean. The entire area - representing about $3bn in property and about 10% of homes - will be underwater in the second half of the century, according to Noaa's projections. 
Two schools, 20 bridges, 21 pumping stations will all be swamped, according to the projections. Some 302 yachts will almost certainly be trapped behind low-lying bridges. Water treatment plants and pumping stations will no longer work.
Cason has no patience for those, like Trump, who deny climate change is occurring. "It's an existential threat to a city like us," he said. So much so that Cason has hired consultants to contemplate a future when it may no longer be able to engineer a way out of sea-level rise. 
"What do you do if and when the water is up so high you can't provide services - when do you stop charging taxes?" he asked. "If your house is underwater, can you stop paying taxes on it?" 
He would like to believe that by the end of the century scientists will have figured out a solution to the rising seas that threaten his city. But there is one thing of which he is certain: Coral Gables will not survive by retreating behind a sea wall. 
 "There is no Dutch solution," he said. "You can't really build a wall around it. It will just come up from below."
                   Shape our coverage                   
How important do you think these issues are? Complete the form below.

Load-Date: July 6, 2016


End of Document




Al Gore: 'I tried my best' but Trump can't be educated on climate change; At UN climate talks in Bonn, Gore heads an unofficial group trying to stop climate change - in sharp contrast to official US position that it doesn't exist
The Guardian(London)
November 10, 2017 Friday 7:18 PM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 898 words
Byline: Oliver Milman
Body


Al Gore has accused Donald Trump of surrounding himself "with the absolute worst of climate deniers" and said he has given up attempting to persuade the president to reverse his dismantling of policies combatting global warming.
However, both Gore, the former US vice-president, and Jerry Brown, governor of California, told the Guardian they were confident the US will regain its leadership position on climate change if Trump is defeated in the next presidential election.
Gore, Brown and Michael Bloomberg, the billionaire former mayor of New York, are heading a broad coalition of climate change hawks from US states, cities and businesses in Bonn, where UN climate talks are being held. This alliance is in sharp contrast to the official US delegation, which is representing the only national government in the world that doesn't want to be part of the Paris climate accords.
"I haven't had any conversations with [Trump] since his speech to withdraw from Paris. I tried my best and thought he'd come to his senses but I've been proven wrong," Gore, who met with Trump during the transition to try to influence his thinking, told the Guardian. "I don't feel I have the ability to change his mind. He's surrounded himself with the absolute worst of climate deniers who seem to have captured his mind on the issue."
Trump has aligned with Scott Pruitt, the head of the US Environmental Protection Agency who is a vocal critic of the Paris deal. Pruitt has cast doubt on whether carbon dioxide drives global warming, and claimed there is "tremendous disagreement" among scientists over climate change. 
Several former and current members of the administration, including Stephen Bannon and Mick Mulvaney, have also previously dismissed evidence for climate science. 
Gore, who is now one of the world's leading voices on climate change, said other countries are "aghast" at Trump's retreat from climate policy but said the backlash both within the US and abroad is encouraging.
"The US cities and states have made a tremendous difference and I think the reaction of the rest of the world has minimized the damage done by Donald Trump," he said. "The reaction to Trump is if anything stronger than the actions Trump is taking.
"This experiment with Trump is less than a year old and in science, experiments are sometimes cut short early. I'm not saying this will happen this time, but this feels like a movie I've seen before.
"We went off the rails a bit in the last election. I think the rest of the world understands that the Trump period is an unfortunate departure from what the US is known for when we are at our best. Those who have appreciated US leadership grieve its loss and hope it's temporary." 
Brown also said he sees little point attempting to sway the Trump administration. "The official policy of the US is that climate change is a total and complete hoax conceived by Chinese conspirators," the California governor told the Guardian. "That is so preposterous that engagement on that basis is just useless."
However, the California governor said mid-term elections in the US next year may pressure Trump to change position. "He's an action orientated person, not a politician, so who knows," he said.
"Ultimately we won't have a denier in the White House forever. We are engaged in a great political struggle between the deniers who want to turn the world over to fossil fuel interests and scientists and concerned activists who want to see decarbonization.
"Donald Trump is a very small point in the overall climate factor. We are facing a moment of truth over whether we can decarbonize or see civilization itself decline over the next 100 years. 
"We have a political sidebar we can tweet about but the existential problem is that species are being destroyed, ecologies are being degraded and mankind is on the chopping block. This isn't the time for politics, it's the time for courageous action."
Brown has attempted to step into the vacuum created by US withdrawal by holding dozens of events and meetings with national leaders, UN officials and NGOs across Europe ahead of the Bonn talks. 
The Democratic governor has taken on a role highlighting the impact of sub-national entities such as California, which would have the sixth largest economy in the world if it were a country and has implemented a 'cap and trade' emissions trading system that may soon be linked to a similar mechanism used by European Union countries.
"I want to strengthen the coalition of states and provinces in order to do everything possible to reduce carbon emissions," Brown said. 
"The great threat to the world is the radically changing climate and the level of indifference and inertia is so powerful that I find it incumbent to build a counterforce of mayors and governments to work together to protect our climate and get us off the carbon addiction."
The Bonn talks, which will run until 17 November, are largely a technical exercize in helping countries implementing the goals of the Paris agreement, where nearly 200 nations agreed to limit global warming to 2C above the pre-industrial era. 
Trump has vowed to pull the US from the agreement but under the pact's rules he will be unable to do so until 2020. In Bonn, the US delegation is expected to follow the lead of the president, a vocal supporter of fossil fuels, by extolling the benefits of "efficient" coal, nuclear energy and natural gas.

Load-Date: November 10, 2017


End of Document




Live Q&A: how do we improve nutrition while tackling climate change?; With climate change, nutrition and food security intimately linked, are world leaders ready to make real progress at COP 21? Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November to discuss
The Guardian
November 26, 2015 Thursday 11:38 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONALS NETWORK
Length: 643 words
Byline: Holly Young
Body


Climate change presents a serious threat to nutrition and food security. 
Earlier this year, the World Food Programme made bleak predictions underlining the connection between the two issues. With climate change increasing the risk and intensity of climate disasters such as floods and drought, unless huge efforts are made to increase climate resilience, the risk of hunger and malnutrition could increase by 20% by 2050. 
It is also a two-way relationship. An estimated 25% of the world's greenhouse gases are produced from global food systems, of which half comes from food production and the other from transportation, packaging, processing and land use for agriculture. 
With world leaders preparing to descend on Paris for climate talks at COP 21, there is clearly an opportunity to make progress on both issues. What are the practical solutions to tackling climate change, while improving nutrition and food security? And what are the challenges involved? 
Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November, 1-3pm GMT, to discuss these questions and more.
                     The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or @GuardianGDP on Twitter to recommend someone for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag #globaldevlive.                   
Panel
                     Peggy Pascal, food security advocacy officer, Action Against Hunger, Paris, France.                      @PascalPeggy                   
Peggy heads up food security advocacy for Action Against Hunger in Paris and has been leading the ACF International Network's climate and nutrition work in the context of COP21. 
                     Dominic Schofield, director, GAIN Canada, Ottawa, Canada.  @dschofieldGAIN                   
Dominic is director of GAIN Canada and senior technical advisor policy and programmes. He has over twenty years in the field of international development with assignments in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, South and Southeast Asia.
                     Anna Lartey, director of nutrition, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.                    
Prior to joining the FAO Anna was a professor of nutrition at the University of Ghana. She worked as a researcher in Sub-Saharan Africa for 27 years and her research focused on maternal child nutrition.
                     Seán Kennedy, senior technical specialist on public health and nutrition, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome, Italy. @IFADnews                   
Seán works primarily on promoting nutrition-sensitive interventions in IFAD's investments, and mainstreaming nutrition across the organisation.
                     Masroora Haque, communications manager, International Centre for Climate Change and Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh, @masroora                                        
Masroora works on climate change, adaptation and policy for the International Centre for Climate Change and Development.
                     Nick Hughes, food sustainability advisor, WWF-UK, London, UK.                    
Nick works on sustainable diets for WWF-UK and leads their partnership with foodservice provider Sodexo.
                     Richard Choularton, chief, Climate and Disaster Risk Reduction Programmes, World Food Programme (WFP), Stowe, USA. @rchoularton                   
Richard leads WFP work on climate change and is an expert on climate change impact on food security and humanitarian crises. 
                     Nabeeha M. Kazi, president and CEO of Humanitas Global and chair of the Community for Zero Hunger, Washington, DC. @nabeehakazi                   
Nabeeha directs integrated development initiatives to expand health, nutrition, child development, and climate change impact and empower communities.

Load-Date: November 26, 2015


End of Document




Live Q&A: how do we improve nutrition while tackling climate change?; With climate change, nutrition and food security intimately linked, are world leaders ready to make real progress at COP 21? Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November to discuss
The Guardian
November 25, 2015 Wednesday 12:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONALS NETWORK
Length: 602 words
Byline: Holly Young
Body


Climate change presents a serious threat to nutrition and food security. 
Earlier this year, the World Food Programme made bleak predictions underlining the connection between the two issues. With climate change increasing the risk and intensity of climate disasters such as floods and drought, unless huge efforts are made to increase climate resilience, the risk of hunger and malnutrition could increase by 20% by 2050. 
It is also a two-way relationship. An estimated 25% of the world's greenhouse gases are produced from global food systems, of which half comes from food production and the other from transportation, packaging, processing and land use for agriculture. 
With world leaders preparing to descend on Paris for climate talks at COP 21, there is clearly an opportunity to make progress on both issues. What are the practical solutions to tackling climate change, while improving nutrition and food security? And what are the challenges involved? 
Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November, 1-3pm GMT, to discuss these questions and more.
                     The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or @GuardianGDP on Twitter to recommend someone for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag #globaldevlive.                   
Panel
                     Peggy Pascal, food security advocacy officer, Action Against Hunger, Paris, France.                      @PascalPeggy                   
Peggy heads up food security advocacy for Action Against Hunger in Paris and has been leading the ACF International Network's climate and nutrition work in the context of COP21. 
                     Dominic Schofield, director, GAIN Canada, Ottawa, Canada.  @dschofieldGAIN                   
Dominic is director of GAIN Canada and senior technical advisor policy and programmes. He has over twenty years in the field of international development with assignments in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, South and Southeast Asia.
                     Anna Lartey, director of nutrition, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.                    
Prior to joining the FAO Anna was a professor of nutrition at the University of Ghana. She worked as a researcher in Sub-Saharan Africa for 27 years and her research focused on maternal child nutrition.
                     Seán Kennedy, senior technical specialist on public health and nutrition, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome, Italy. @IFADnews                   
Seán works primarily on promoting nutrition-sensitive interventions in IFAD's investments, and mainstreaming nutrition across the organisation.
                     Masroora Haque, communications manager, International Centre for Climate Change and Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh, @masroora                                        
Masroora works on climate change, adaptation and policy for the International Centre for Climate Change and Development.
                     Nick Hughes, food sustainability advisor, WWF-UK, London, UK.                    
Nick works on sustainable diets for WWF-UK and leads their partnership with foodservice provider Sodexo.
                     Richard Choularton, chief, Climate and Disaster Risk Reduction Programmes, World Food Programme (WFP), Stowe, USA. @rchoularton                   
Richard leads WFP work on climate change and is an expert on climate change impact on food security and humanitarian crises. 
                     More panellists to be announced.                    

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document




Live Q&A: how do we improve nutrition while tackling climate change?; With climate change, nutrition and food security intimately linked, are world leaders ready to make real progress at COP 21? Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November to discuss
The Guardian
November 25, 2015 Wednesday 11:49 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONALS NETWORK
Length: 546 words
Byline: Holly Young
Body


Climate change presents a serious threat to nutrition and food security. 
Earlier this year, the World Food Programme made bleak predictions underlining the connection between the two issues. With climate change increasing the risk and intensity of climate disasters such as floods and drought, unless huge efforts are made to increase climate resilience, the risk of hunger and malnutrition could increase by 20% by 2050. 
It is also a two-way relationship. An estimated 25% of the world's greenhouse gases are produced from global food systems, of which half comes from food production and the other from transportation, packaging, processing and land use for agriculture. 
With world leaders preparing to descend on Paris for climate talks at COP 21, there is clearly an opportunity to make progress on both issues. What are the practical solutions to tackling climate change, while improving nutrition and food security? And what are the challenges involved? 
Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November, 1-3pm GMT, to discuss these questions and more.
                     The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or @GuardianGDP on Twitter to recommend someone for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag #globaldevlive.                   
Panel
                     Peggy Pascal, food security advocacy officer, Action Against Hunger, Paris, France.                      @PascalPeggy                   
Peggy heads up food security advocacy for Action Against Hunger in Paris and has been leading the ACF International Network's climate and nutrition work in the context of COP21. 
                     Dominic Schofield, director, GAIN Canada, Ottawa, Canada.  @dschofieldGAIN                   
Dominic is director of GAIN Canada and senior technical advisor policy and programmes. He has over twenty years in the field of international development with assignments in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, South and Southeast Asia.
                     Anna Lartey, director of nutrition, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.                    
Prior to joining the FAO Anna was a professor of nutrition at the University of Ghana. She worked as a researcher in Sub-Saharan Africa for 27 years and her research focused on maternal child nutrition.
                     Masroora Haque, communications manager, International Centre for Climate Change and Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh, @masroora                                        
Masroora works on climate change, adaptation and policy for the International Centre for Climate Change and Development.
                     Nick Hughes, food sustainability advisor, WWF-UK, London, UK.                    
Nick works on sustainable diets for WWF-UK and leads their partnership with foodservice provider Sodexo.
                     Richard Choularton, chief, Climate and Disaster Risk Reduction Programmes, World Food Programme (WFP), Stowe, USA. @rchoularton                   
Richard leads WFP work on climate change and is an expert on climate change impact on food security and humanitarian crises. 
                     More panellists to be announced.                    

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document




Publisher rejects Craig Kelly complaint school textbook 'inaccurate' on climate change; Liberal MP took issue with year-1o history book statements linking extreme weather to climate change
The Guardian(London)
February 26, 2019 Tuesday 5:20 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 458 words
Byline: Lisa Martin
Body


The publisher of a NSW year-10 history book has rejected complaints from the federal Liberal backbencher Craig Kelly that it misrepresents facts about climate change.
Kelly took issue with the characterisation of climate change in the textbook Pearson History New South Wales.
Kelly has written to the NSW education minister, Rob Stokes, saying the book's description of Tony Abbott as a climate change denier was "an offensive slur equating it with Holocaust deniers", the Daily Telegraph reported.
The book says: "Climate change is noticeable in Australia, with more extreme frequent weather events such as the 2002-06 drought or the 2010-11 Queensland floods."
"That is simply an inaccurate statement that is in a school history book," Kelly told parliament's federation chamber last week.
"What chance do we have of forming the best policies in this nation to deal with fire, floods and drought if we have children being misled by incorrect information in our history books?"
He quoted Dorothea Mackellar's poem My Country to argue contemporary natural disasters are nothing out of the ordinary: "I love a sunburnt country, a land of sweeping plains, of ragged mountain ranges, of droughts and flooding rains," the poem says.
"We need to understand that we live in that same country that Dorothea Mackellar wrote about over a hundred years ago," Kelly said.
"That is why we need to prepare and help people recover from their resources instead of wasting money pretending that we can change the weather."
The Australian Bureau of Meterology says "one of the greatest impacts of climate variability and climate change occurs through changes in the frequency and severity of extreme events."
It describes the 2011 Brisbane floods as the second-highest flood level of the last 100 years, after January 1974.
The bureau and CSIRO's latest State of the Climate report said Australia was experiencing more extreme heat, longer fire seasons, rising oceans and more marine heatwaves, consistent with a changing climate.
A spokeswoman for the publisher Pearson backed the book.
"Pearson builds textbooks to support the Australian curriculum and we stand by this text book and its author," she said.
Nonetheless, Stokes said he was writing to Pearson about Kelly's concerns.
"It is very important that texts present information in a balanced way so that students can make up their own minds on important issues," he said in a statement.
Stokes has previously criticised Abbott's climate change stance, warning against "populist anti-intellectualism" from public figures.
The NSW school history curriculum does not specifically mention climate change and there is no mandatory textbook set.
While the state government sets the syllabus, it does not write or set the textbooks.

Load-Date: February 26, 2019


End of Document




Climate change may have helped spread Zika virus according to WHO scientists; Warmer and wetter conditions facilitate transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, which may have added to spread, says lead climate change scientist
The Guardian
February 11, 2016 Thursday 10:02 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS
Length: 929 words
Byline: Oliver Milman in New York
Body


The outbreak of Zika virus in Central and South America is of immediate concern to pregnant women in the region, but for some experts the situation is a glimpse of the sort of public health threats that will unfold due to climate change.
 "Zika is the kind of thing we've been ranting about for 20 years," said Daniel Brooks, a biologist at University of Nebraska-Lincoln. "We should've anticipated it. Whenever the planet has faced a major climate change event, man-made or not, species have moved around and their pathogens have come into contact with species with no resistance."
 It's still not clear what role rising temperatures and altered rainfall patterns have had on the spread of Zika, which is mainly spread by mosquitos; the increased global movement of people is probably as great an influence as climate change for the spread of infectious diseases. But the World Health Organization, which declared a public health emergency over the birth defects linked to Zika, is clear that changes in climate mean a redrawn landscape for vector and water-borne diseases.
 Related:  Should we wipe mosquitoes off the face of the Earth?
According to WHO, a global temperature rise of 2-3C will increase the number of people at risk of malaria by around 3-5%, which equates to several hundred million. In areas where malaria is already endemic, the seasonal duration of malaria is likely to lengthen. Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that carries Zika and other diseases, is expected to thrive in warmer conditions. 
 As climate change reaches almost every corner of the Earth's ecology, different diseases could be unleashed. Increased precipitation will create more pools of standing water for mosquitos, risking malaria and rift valley fever. Deforestation and agricultural intensification also heightens malaria risk while ocean warming, driven by the vast amounts of heat being sucked up by the oceans, can cause toxic algal blooms that can lead to infections in humans.
 "We know that warmer and wetter conditions facilitate the transmission of mosquito-borne diseases so it's plausible that climate conditions have added the spread of Zika," said Dr Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, a lead scientist on climate change at WHO. 
 "Infectious agents in water will proliferate with more flooding. It's clear that we need to strengthen our surveillance and response to a range of diseases. Globalization, the movement of people, is an important factor too. In a world where we are disrupting the climate system we'll have to pay the price for that."
 WHO estimates that an additional 250,000 people will die due to climate change impacts - ranging from heat stress to disease - by 2050, but Campbell-Lendrum said this is a "conservative estimate".
 "It is based on optimistic assumptions that the world will get richer and we'll get better at treating these diseases," he said. "We do need to get better at controlling diseases at their source and we do need to drive down greenhouse gases because there is a limit to our adaption. By moving to cleaner energy sources we will also help relieve one of the largest health burdens we have, which is the air pollution that kills seven million people a year."
 Until now, efforts to push back the threat of infectious diseases has been successful. Malaria, for example, used to be found in the New York area - and there is evidence to suggest it was once present in southern England ; much earlier, the Romans used to retreat to the hills at certain times of the year to avoid mosquitos carrying the disease. Vaccines have been developed for a range of diseases including, belatedly, Ebola. 
 The eradication of threats like these makes wealthy western countries fret over outbreaks like Zika. As the world warms, there may be a lack of preparation for other diseases not currently considered threats.
 "This is likely to become an equal opportunity crisis," said Brooks. "The developing, poorer countries are impacted disproportionately but they deal with these diseases all the time, they are not surprised by them. But in Europe and North America, people have lived in a bubble where we think our wealth and technology can protect us from climate change. And that's not true.
 "The thing that worries me most is a death by a thousand cuts. I don't think an Andromeda strain will wipe out all humans. But the amount of time, money and effort needed to combat these many different problems can overwhelm a healthcare system."
 So which climate-fueled diseases are likely to pop up next? Some experts believe that water-borne diseases could escalate, which would have significant consequences for countries such as Bangladesh - a low-lying nation with plenty of rivers that has a public health system already struggling to meet its population's current needs.
 "There's not nearly enough attention paid to diseases that cause diarrhea, crypto spiridium, Hepatitis A," said Aaron Bernstein, a pediatrician at Harvard Medical School. 
"We've seen outbreaks of these diseases in the past due to extreme precipitation. The build environment we live in wasn't designed for the climate we will soon be living in; when you consider half the world's waterways have been engineered by man, they won't be able to contain the extra water that will flood them.
 "Flooding will certainly lead to mosquito-borne diseases but also cause water-borne diseases and also a lack of drinking water. People in Asia and Africa, particularly those living on the coast, will be very vulnerable, climate change could be the straw that breaks the camel's back in terms of public health."

Load-Date: February 11, 2016


End of Document




Climate change may have helped spread Zika virus, according to WHO scientists; Warmer and wetter conditions facilitate transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, which may have added to spread, says lead climate change scientist
The Guardian
February 17, 2016 Wednesday 11:47 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS
Length: 929 words
Byline: Oliver Milman in New York
Body


The outbreak of Zika virus in Central and South America is of immediate concern to pregnant women in the region, but for some experts the situation is a glimpse of the sort of public health threats that will unfold due to climate change.
 "Zika is the kind of thing we've been ranting about for 20 years," said Daniel Brooks, a biologist at University of Nebraska-Lincoln. "We should've anticipated it. Whenever the planet has faced a major climate change event, man-made or not, species have moved around and their pathogens have come into contact with species with no resistance."
 It's still not clear what role rising temperatures and altered rainfall patterns have had on the spread of Zika, which is mainly spread by mosquitos; the increased global movement of people is probably as great an influence as climate change for the spread of infectious diseases. But the World Health Organization, which declared a public health emergency over the birth defects linked to Zika, is clear that changes in climate mean a redrawn landscape for vector and water-borne diseases.
 Related:  Should we wipe mosquitoes off the face of the Earth?
According to WHO, a global temperature rise of 2-3C will increase the number of people at risk of malaria by around 3-5%, which equates to several hundred million. In areas where malaria is already endemic, the seasonal duration of malaria is likely to lengthen. Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that carries Zika and other diseases, is expected to thrive in warmer conditions. 
 As climate change reaches almost every corner of the Earth's ecology, different diseases could be unleashed. Increased precipitation will create more pools of standing water for mosquitos, risking malaria and rift valley fever. Deforestation and agricultural intensification also heightens malaria risk while ocean warming, driven by the vast amounts of heat being sucked up by the oceans, can cause toxic algal blooms that can lead to infections in humans.
 "We know that warmer and wetter conditions facilitate the transmission of mosquito-borne diseases so it's plausible that climate conditions have added the spread of Zika," said Dr Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, a lead scientist on climate change at WHO. 
 "Infectious agents in water will proliferate with more flooding. It's clear that we need to strengthen our surveillance and response to a range of diseases. Globalization, the movement of people, is an important factor too. In a world where we are disrupting the climate system we'll have to pay the price for that."
 WHO estimates that an additional 250,000 people will die due to climate change impacts - ranging from heat stress to disease - by 2050, but Campbell-Lendrum said this is a "conservative estimate".
 "It is based on optimistic assumptions that the world will get richer and we'll get better at treating these diseases," he said. "We do need to get better at controlling diseases at their source and we do need to drive down greenhouse gases because there is a limit to our adaption. By moving to cleaner energy sources we will also help relieve one of the largest health burdens we have, which is the air pollution that kills seven million people a year."
 Until now, efforts to push back the threat of infectious diseases has been successful. Malaria, for example, used to be found in the New York area - and there is evidence to suggest it was once present in southern England ; much earlier, the Romans used to retreat to the hills at certain times of the year to avoid mosquitos carrying the disease. Vaccines have been developed for a range of diseases including, belatedly, Ebola. 
 The eradication of threats like these makes wealthy western countries fret over outbreaks like Zika. As the world warms, there may be a lack of preparation for other diseases not currently considered threats.
 "This is likely to become an equal opportunity crisis," said Brooks. "The developing, poorer countries are impacted disproportionately but they deal with these diseases all the time, they are not surprised by them. But in Europe and North America, people have lived in a bubble where we think our wealth and technology can protect us from climate change. And that's not true.
 "The thing that worries me most is a death by a thousand cuts. I don't think an Andromeda strain will wipe out all humans. But the amount of time, money and effort needed to combat these many different problems can overwhelm a healthcare system."
 So which climate-fueled diseases are likely to pop up next? Some experts believe that water-borne diseases could escalate, which would have significant consequences for countries such as Bangladesh - a low-lying nation with plenty of rivers that has a public health system already struggling to meet its population's current needs.
 "There's not nearly enough attention paid to diseases that cause diarrhea, crypto spiridium, Hepatitis A," said Aaron Bernstein, a pediatrician at Harvard Medical School. 
"We've seen outbreaks of these diseases in the past due to extreme precipitation. The build environment we live in wasn't designed for the climate we will soon be living in; when you consider half the world's waterways have been engineered by man, they won't be able to contain the extra water that will flood them.
 "Flooding will certainly lead to mosquito-borne diseases but also cause water-borne diseases and also a lack of drinking water. People in Asia and Africa, particularly those living on the coast, will be very vulnerable, climate change could be the straw that breaks the camel's back in terms of public health."

Load-Date: February 17, 2016


End of Document




Seven practical steps to protect our cities from the effects of climate change; We must prepare for climate change now if we want to achieve the global goal of making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
The Guardian
October 12, 2015 Monday 9:48 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT
Length: 934 words
Byline: Dr Aditya V Bahadur
Body


Making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable is now a global goal following the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda in New York in September. Achieving this target - sustainable development goal 11 - is vital because, for the first time in our history, more people live in cities than live in the countryside. And it is urgent because a third of the urban population lives in slums, mostly located on hazardous land, with poor access to basic services, and few opportunities to earn a decent living.
Another huge challenge is that urban areas mostly develop along coasts and rivers, making many city dwellers vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This has led to a growing discussion on how to make cities resilient to flooding, rising sea levels, heatwaves and other harmful results of our changing climate. However these discussions are not yet taking place on a practical level, and there is no blueprint for immediate action.
 Related: Urban growth meets climate change: Asia proves need for integrated approach | Julian Hunt and Yuguo Li
To address this knowledge gap, the Overseas Development Institute is looking at practical examples from around the world, and our initial research shows that seven actions are key in helping towns and cities deal with climate change. What is more, we can start implementing them today:
    • The right information and knowledge is crucial. Those making plans and policies must know how exposed cities are, and whether urban systems are capable of dealing with the effects of climate change. A number of traditional methods can be used to gather this information, including surveys and climate models. Newer approaches are constantly being tested. For instance, in Jakarta, agencies are trying to understand flood patterns by gathering information from tweets sent by those living in areas affected by floods.
    • This knowledge must be fed into comprehensive urban planning processes. Research from New Zealand shows that including exposure and vulnerability to disasters in land-use plans means neighbourhoods don't spring up in hazardous areas, and ensures the protection of ecosystems that help cushion the blows that a changing climate may bring. It is also vital to include the thoughts of those living in the worst affected areas - often poor communities - while developing these plans.
    • Transport, energy, telecommunications, water and sanitation sectors must be geared to function during disasters. Simple changes can deliver massive gains for resilience. The main reason the New York subway resumed so quickly during hurricane Sandy was because employees had participated in months of emergency planning and evacuation drills. In some cases, structural improvements and technology upgrades are needed: making sure rail tracks can withstand extreme temperatures or that drains are built to handle extreme rainfall.
 Related: Micro-insurance offers poor families in poorer countries protection from destitution | Amy Yee
    • City authorities must have the right training and skills. Engineers and planners must understand how climate is going to affect their departments. They can establish networks of cities to share this learning. In Latin America and the Caribbean, cities that had made progress on preparing for climate change were linked with others that had not. Being connected to places facing similar problems, but with different levels of preparedness, motivated city officials to do better.
    • In the case of extreme "outlier" events that occur once every 200 years or so, city residents must be able to fend for themselves until government support arrives. City governments and non-governmental organisations must work with vulnerable residents to ensure that they have the right resources. Projects in northern India involved appointing community volunteers to take people to safety, enabling savings groups so that people have money to fall back on, or ensuring that essential services, such as water and electricity, come from multiple sources, should primary sources fail.
    • Local businesses must be involved, as they lead urban expansion across the global south. Guilds of masons, contractors and builders can be made aware of the expected impacts of climate change, and trained in resilient building techniques. In Vietnam, small, inexpensive changes to roof design have helped houses withstand typhoons. Governments can also urge the private sector to provide disaster insurance to small businesses. In north-east India, a pilot project to provide insurance to fruit and vegetable vendors is showing early signs of significant success.
    • Attracting finance for urban resilience is vitally important. The good news is that a lot can be done with what is available already. In many developing countries, significant government resources have been earmarked for urban development and renewal. The two main national urban development programmes in India have $10bn funding each and so resilience can be built by ensuring that climate change is factored into the projects funded through these.
If we make progress in these seven areas, our cities will become more resilient. These efforts will breathe life into SDG11, ensuring that vulnerable cities and human settlements are made inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable by 2030.
    • Dr Aditya V Bahadur is a senior research officer at the Overseas Development Institute. This piece is taken from a forthcoming report that he is authoring for the Asian Development Bank, The State of Practical Knowledge on Enhancing Urban Climate Change Resilience: Seven Entry Points for Action

Load-Date: October 12, 2015


End of Document




Seven practical steps to protect our cities from the effects of climate change; We must prepare for climate change now if we want to achieve the global goal of making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
The Guardian
October 9, 2015 Friday 3:33 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT
Length: 926 words
Byline: Dr Aditya V Bahadur
Body


Making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable is now a global goal following the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda in New York in September. Achieving this target - sustainable development goal 11 - is vital because, for the first time in our history, more people live in cities than live in the countryside. And it is urgent because a third of the urban population lives in slums, mostly located on hazardous land, with poor access to basic services, and few opportunities to earn a decent living.
Another huge challenge is that urban areas mostly develop along coasts and rivers, making many city dwellers vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This has led to a growing discussion on how to make cities resilient to flooding, rising sea levels, heatwaves and other harmful results of our changing climate. However these discussions are not yet taking place on a practical level, and there is no blueprint for immediate action.
 Related: Urban growth meets climate change: Asia proves need for integrated approach | Julian Hunt and Yuguo Li
To address this knowledge gap, the Overseas Development Institute is looking at practical examples from around the world, and our initial research shows that seven actions are key in helping towns and cities deal with climate change. What is more, we can start implementing them today:
    • The right information and knowledge is crucial. Those making plans and policies must know how exposed cities are, and whether urban systems are capable of dealing with the effects of climate change. A number of traditional methods can be used to gather this information, including surveys and climate models. Newer approaches are constantly being tested. For instance, in Jakarta, agencies are trying to understand flood patterns by gathering information from tweets sent by those living in areas affected by floods.
    • This knowledge must be fed into comprehensive urban planning processes. Research from New Zealand shows that including exposure and vulnerability to disasters in land-use plans means neighbourhoods don't spring up in hazardous areas, and ensures the protection of ecosystems that help cushion the blows that a changing climate may bring. It is also vital to include the thoughts of those living in the worst affected areas - often poor communities - while developing these plans.
    • Transport, energy, telecommunications, water and sanitation sectors must be geared to function during disasters. Simple changes can deliver massive gains for resilience. The main reason the New York subway resumed so quickly during hurricane Sandy was because employees had participated in months of emergency planning and evacuation drills. In some cases, structural improvements and technology upgrades are needed: making sure rail tracks can withstand extreme temperatures or that drains are built to handle extreme rainfall.
 Related: Micro-insurance offers poor families in poorer countries protection from destitution | Amy Yee
    • City authorities must have the right training and skills. Engineers and planners must understand how climate is going to affect their departments. They can establish networks of cities to share this learning. In Latin America and the Caribbean, cities that had made progress on preparing for climate change were linked with others that had not. Being connected to places facing similar problems, but with different levels of preparedness, motivated city officials to do better.
    • In the case of extreme "outlier" events that occur once every 200 years or so, city residents must be able to fend for themselves until government support arrives. City governments and non-governmental organisations must work with vulnerable residents to ensure that they have the right resources. Projects in northern India involved appointing community volunteers to take people to safety, enabling savings groups so that people have money to fall back on, or ensuring that essential services, such as water and electricity, come from multiple sources, should primary sources fail.
    • Local businesses must be involved, as they lead urban expansion across the global south. Guilds of masons, contractors and builders can be made aware of the expected impacts of climate change, and trained in resilient building techniques. In Vietnam, small, inexpensive changes to roof design have helped houses withstand typhoons. Governments can also urge the private sector to provide disaster insurance to small businesses. In north-east India, a pilot project to provide insurance to fruit and vegetable vendors is showing early signs of significant success.
    • Attracting finance for urban resilience is vitally important. The good news is that a lot can be done with what is available already. In many developing countries, significant government resources have been earmarked for urban development and renewal. The two main national urban development programmes in India have $10bn funding each and so resilience can be built by ensuring that climate change is factored into the projects funded through these.
If we make progress in these seven areas, our cities will become more resilient. These efforts will breathe life into SDG11, ensuring that vulnerable cities and human settlements are made inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable by 2030.
    • Dr Aditya V Bahadur is a senior research officer at the Overseas Development Institute. He is the lead author of a forthcoming ODI report, The State of Practical Knowledge on Enhancing Urban Climate Change Resilience: Seven Entry Points for Action

Load-Date: October 18, 2015


End of Document




Between Covid, climate change and the budget, no wonder many women are rethinking having babies
The Guardian (London)
October 18, 2020 Sunday 5:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:1
Length: 877 words
Byline: Jane Caro
Highlight: Josh Frydenberg has urged women to have more children - but there was nothing in the budget to encourage them to do so


Body


In July in a speech to the National Press Club, treasurer Josh Frydenberg urged Australian women to have more babies. He was lighthearted about it (well, he can be, of course, it isn't his body or financial future that will bear the brunt or the baby). "I won't go as far as to say, like Peter Costello, one for the mother, one for the father and one for the country. But I can say people should feel encouraged about the future, and the more children we have across the country, together with migration, we will build our population growth and that will be good for the economy."
A new baby boom may well be good for the economy, but the question increasingly being asked by women of child-bearing age is whether it will be good for either them or for the children they may give birth to. Dr Ginni Mansberg, a GP in the Sydney suburb of Sans Souci, has noticed an interesting trend at her practice this year. "I've had patients who had stopped taking the pill to get pregnant coming back in for another script telling me 'now's not the right time.'" And the statistics back her observation to the hilt.
Australia's current birthrate is 12.561 births per 1,000 people, that's down by 1.25% from last year. The year before, the birth rate declined by 1.23%. For the decade between 2008 and 2019, birth rates also declined but at a much slower rate. 2008 was the last time birth rates declined by above 1% and that was the year of the GFC, of course. It appears women also vote with their fertility, and when times get tough they decide - quite understandably as Mansberg's patients put it - that it's not a good idea to reproduce.
Frankly, who can blame them? All of us agree that 2020 has been the year from hell and 2019 was not much better, certainly not for Australia. After a horrific drought that made even rainforests vulnerable to fire, we spent much of the last summer choking on bushfire smoke even if we lived in the inner city. And in January, the Australian Medical Association included pregnant women in the list of people vulnerable to adverse health effects from that smoke. All but the most fervent climate change denialists know that despite this year's rain, we will face mega blazes again and soon. Not to mention floods, droughts, dust storms, cyclones and all the other "big weather" that global warming is bringing our way. And younger people tend to both accept the science of climate change and understand that they are the ones whose future will be blighted by it. Why would they want to bring another generation into the world as long as the generation currently in power, including Frydenberg, stubbornly refuses to do anything much about it?
Anyone who did have a baby in the last 12 to 18 months has my deepest sympathy. Thanks to Covid-19, they have had to deal with pregnancy with much less support than usual. Husbands, partners and others close to the expectant mother have not been able to attend ultrasounds or obstetrician's appointments. And only a partner or support person can attend the birth. New grandparents were not able to see grandchildren during lockdown or offer the new parents any of the usual support. And being shut in a small apartment with a small baby (or young children of any description) is a trial for even the most patient and loving of parents. What it must have been like trying to entertain a toddler in hotel quarantine does not bear thinking about.
So, given all of this, not to mention the usual "motherhood penalty" (according to the American Association of University Women mothers earn 70c to every dollar earned by fathers), don't you think Frydenberg might have thought just a little bit about what might actually encourage women to reproduce?
Oddly, he and his government appear to have done precisely the opposite. First, they dedicated 0.038% of the total budget deficit to measures specifically aimed at women. A spend so small it is positively derisory. They did nothing to make childcare more affordable, despite Australia having the fourth-most expensive childcare system in the world. Add that to the fact that many, many more Australian parents send their children to fee-charging schools than in the three countries with childcare more expensive than ours (UK, US and New Zealand) and the proposed hike in university fees for many subjects and you can see why prospective parents are anxiously doing their sums about how many - if any - children they can actually afford.
Then there is the lack of any stimulus or support for female-dominated industries, the tax disincentives - rising to an effective workplace disincentive rate of up to 120% if they want to re-enter the workforce full-time according to KPMG - that keep women trapped in low-paying part-time and casual work. Or how all that snowballs over a lifetime to create our current reality - that the face of poverty is increasingly a woman over 60. Even the fastest-growing group among the homeless - women over 55 - found nothing in the budget for them.
No wonder GPs such as Mansberg are currently reissuing more scripts for contraceptives. Many young women just need to look at the fate of their own mothers, aunts and grandmothers to see that the price we charge women for deciding to become mothers is just too high to pay.

Load-Date: October 18, 2020


End of Document




International law stays silent on the responsibility for climate change; Climate change affects everything from public health to migration patterns. So why has the legal response to a global problem been so weak?
The Guardian
December 11, 2014 Thursday 5:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Length: 1168 words
Byline: Stephen Humphreys
Body


Climate change hurts innocent people. It puts ordinary people, who for the most part have not contributed in any way to global warming, at extraordinary risk.
The IPPC's Climate Change 2014 Synthesis report makes for sobering reading when they write about the consequences of climate change: "injury and death due to more intense heat waves and fires"; floods and droughts, and a rise in "foodborne and waterborne diseases".
This risk is not just a matter of extreme weather events, such as the heatwave in Russia that took an estimated 55,000 lives in 2010 or last year's typhoon Haiyan, recording the fastest wind speeds on record. It is also the intensifying effect climate change has on other intractable global problems such as war, famine, and economic migration. Repeated hot summers contributed to a spike in droughts across Syria, for example, triggering hardship and riots that culminated in the vicious civil war now underway.
In 1992 the nations of the world entered a binding agreement to stop "dangerous anthropogenic interference" with the earth's atmosphere. In the two decades since, that obligation has failed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; quite the contrary, as levels have since soared to rates unthinkable in 1992. The United Nations Framework on Climate Change (UNFCCC), as the 1992 agreement is known, has sent a yearly caravan of politicians, activists and lawyers to some of the world's finest resorts to thrash out a binding agreement - but so far with little effect. (Hopes are still pinned on finding common ground at the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris next year).
Elsewhere, the law has had nothing to say on this important issue. The global economy is underpinned by law, but you would think it had nothing to do with climate change. Climate-related cases have been absent from international courts - even from disputes involving human rights, investment or the environment. While there have been cases heard in some national courts, particularly in the US, they do not progress far.
The weak legal response to climate change means that big polluters are getting off lightly. It is clear that 60% of proven oil reserves must be left in the ground if we are to have even a remote chance of limiting global warming to two degrees. Yet oil companies and exporters continue to drill and explore, to enjoy their assets and hedge against future losses, as though climate change were a mere financial risk rather than an existential threat to peoples' lives and livelihoods.
The world of international law is behaving as though the problem of climate change does not exist.
Investment law
A significant case was decided recently by a panel of international arbitrators in The Hague. Yukos versus Russia involved the compensation of three named shareholders in Mikhail Khodorkhovsky's former oil company, Yukos, which was driven to bankruptcy - allegedly by Russian tax policy. The case is noteworthy as it involves probably the largest arbitration award in history, at $50bn (£31.8bn).
The case is a reminder of just how much power a three-person international panel can wield over national tax policy, allowing them to take vast quantities of money from Russian taxpayers and put it into the hands of private shareholders. It is also notable for the methods by which the panel arrived at this extraordinary sum. The number represents a portion of the money the shareholders were held to have lost through sales of oil that would have been extracted between 2004 and 2011, had Yukos not been bankrupted first.
In other words, the panel ruled that between 2004 and 2011, with greenhouse gas emissions rising at record rates worldwide, those who had played a part in environmental destruction (and profited from it) should nevertheless be compensated to the tune for not having been free to produce more greenhouse gasses.
Put like this the ruling seems bizarre, but as any lawyer will tell you the panel was only ruling on the issues as presented. Both Yukos and Russia recommended the panel follow the indexed market price for oil and gas in Russia over the period, which generally rose. The overwhelming public interest in stemming climate change was absent from the proceedings and from the court's calculations. The human, social, environmental costs were irrelevant or, as economists like to say, "externalised".
International trade law
Unfortunately, the same problem also afflicts other areas of international law. One obvious policy for any state serious about addressing climate change would be to impose low carbon standards on the production of ordinary everyday goods such as meat, mobile phones, and plastics. But if you impose standards on goods at home, you must also impose them on imports or domestic industry will become uncompetitive and suffer.
Does international trade law allow states to impose low-carbon standards on imported goods? The answer is yes and no. A low or zero-carbon import policy is almost certain to violate World Trade Organization (WTO) law, but there are some exceptions. Being granted an exception is time consuming and expensive, and there is a significant risk the WTO's principal court will shut down any such a policy, regardless. No country has yet tried.
Why has the WTO not taken more proactive steps to tackle climate change? And why has the estimated $600bn (£382bn) in annual subsidies to fossil fuels never been challenged, while paltry subsidies to support renewable energy technologies have been stopped?
Human rights law
Given the self-evident harms inflicted by climate change on internationally protected human rights to health, food, water, shelter and to life itself, one might expect human rights law to provide a viable route to mount a challenge. But this has proved complicated. Many of the principal victims of climate change do not live in the countries where emissions are highest, a key feature of climate injustice. This makes it difficult or impossible to sue.
Where people directly affected by the changing climate already live in high-emitting countries such the US, Canada, Australia or the European nations, human rights may yet provide some effective relief. Litigation is beginning to happen in some of these places, but there are still significant hurdles.
Regards harm to the climate, courts are faced with lengthy and complicated causal chains that appear at first sight quite unlike the existing case law. Courts need imagination in these cases, but so far they have rarely displayed it.
                     More articles like this:                   
    • Philanthropreneurship: welcome to the new age of philanthropy
    • An economic system that supports people and planet is still possible
    • Society must call business' bluff on its fixation with profit maximisation
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts.                                            Become a GSB member                                          to get more stories like this direct to your inbox                   

Load-Date: December 16, 2014


End of Document




International law stays silent on the responsibility for climate change; Climate change affects everything from public health to migration patterns. So why has the legal response to a global problem been so weak?
The Guardian
December 12, 2014 Friday 11:20 AM GMT


Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 1168 words
Byline: Stephen Humphreys
Body


Climate change hurts innocent people. It puts ordinary people, who for the most part have not contributed in any way to global warming, at extraordinary risk.
The IPPC's Climate Change 2014 Synthesis report makes for sobering reading when they write about the consequences of climate change: "injury and death due to more intense heat waves and fires"; floods and droughts, and a rise in "foodborne and waterborne diseases".
This risk is not just a matter of extreme weather events, such as the heatwave in Russia that took an estimated 55,000 lives in 2010 or last year's typhoon Haiyan, recording the fastest wind speeds on record. It is also the intensifying effect climate change has on other intractable global problems such as war, famine, and economic migration. Repeated hot summers contributed to a spike in droughts across Syria, for example, triggering hardship and riots that culminated in the vicious civil war now underway.
In 1992 the nations of the world entered a binding agreement to stop "dangerous anthropogenic interference" with the earth's atmosphere. In the two decades since, that obligation has failed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; quite the contrary, as levels have since soared to rates unthinkable in 1992. The United Nations Framework on Climate Change (UNFCCC), as the 1992 agreement is known, has sent a yearly caravan of politicians, activists and lawyers to some of the world's finest resorts to thrash out a binding agreement - but so far with little effect. (Hopes are still pinned on finding common ground at the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris next year).
Elsewhere, the law has had nothing to say on this important issue. The global economy is underpinned by law, but you would think it had nothing to do with climate change. Climate-related cases have been absent from international courts - even from disputes involving human rights, investment or the environment. While there have been cases heard in some national courts, particularly in the US, they do not progress far.
The weak legal response to climate change means that big polluters are getting off lightly. It is clear that 60% of proven oil reserves must be left in the ground if we are to have even a remote chance of limiting global warming to two degrees. Yet oil companies and exporters continue to drill and explore, to enjoy their assets and hedge against future losses, as though climate change were a mere financial risk rather than an existential threat to peoples' lives and livelihoods.
The world of international law is behaving as though the problem of climate change does not exist.
Investment law
A significant case was decided recently by a panel of international arbitrators in The Hague. Yukos versus Russia involved the compensation of five named shareholders in Mikhail Khodorkhovsky's former oil company, Yukos, which was driven to bankruptcy - allegedly by Russian tax policy. The case is noteworthy as it involves probably the largest arbitration award in history, at $50bn (£31.8bn).
The case is a reminder of just how much power a three-person international panel can wield over national tax policy, allowing them to take vast quantities of money from Russian taxpayers and put it into the hands of private shareholders. It is also notable for the methods by which the panel arrived at this extraordinary sum. The number represents a portion of the money the shareholders were held to have lost through sales of oil that would have been extracted between 2004 and 2011, had Yukos not been bankrupted first.
In other words, the panel ruled that between 2004 and 2011, with greenhouse gas emissions rising at record rates worldwide, those who had played a part in environmental destruction (and profited from it) should nevertheless be compensated to the tune for not having been free to produce more greenhouse gasses.
Put like this the ruling seems bizarre, but as any lawyer will tell you the panel was only ruling on the issues as presented. Both Yukos and Russia recommended the panel follow the indexed market price for oil and gas in Russia over the period, which generally rose. The overwhelming public interest in stemming climate change was absent from the proceedings and from the court's calculations. The human, social, environmental costs were irrelevant or, as economists like to say, "externalised".
International trade law
Unfortunately, the same problem also afflicts other areas of international law. One obvious policy for any state serious about addressing climate change would be to impose low carbon standards on the production of ordinary everyday goods such as meat, mobile phones, and plastics. But if you impose standards on goods at home, you must also impose them on imports or domestic industry will become uncompetitive and suffer.
Does international trade law allow states to impose low-carbon standards on imported goods? The answer is yes and no. A low or zero-carbon import policy is almost certain to violate World Trade Organization (WTO) law. There may be viable policies but they will be time consuming and expensive to design, and there is no guarantee the WTO's principal court won't slap down any such policy on a technicality. No country has yet tried. 
Why has the WTO not taken more proactive steps to tackle climate change? And why has the estimated $600bn (£382bn) in annual subsidies to fossil fuels never been challenged, while paltry subsidies to support renewable energy technologies have been stopped?
Human rights law
Given the self-evident harms inflicted by climate change on internationally protected human rights to health, food, water, shelter and to life itself, one might expect human rights law to provide a viable route to mount a challenge. But this has proved complicated. Many of the principal victims of climate change do not live in the countries where emissions are highest, a key feature of climate injustice. This makes it difficult or impossible to sue.
Where people directly affected by the changing climate already live in high-emitting countries such as the US, Canada, Australia or the European nations, human rights may yet provide some effective relief. Litigation is beginning to happen in some of these places, but there are still significant hurdles.
As regards harm to the climate, courts are faced with lengthy and complicated causal chains that appear at first sight quite unlike the existing case law. Courts need imagination in these cases, but so far they have rarely displayed it.
                     More articles like this:                   
    • Philanthropreneurship: welcome to the new age of philanthropy
    • An economic system that supports people and planet is still possible
    • Society must call business' bluff on its fixation with profit maximisation
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts.                                            Become a GSB member                                          to get more stories like this direct to your inbox                   

Load-Date: December 16, 2014


End of Document




International law stays silent on the responsibility for climate change; Climate change affects everything from public health to migration patterns. So why has the legal response to a global problem been so weak?
The Guardian
December 11, 2014 Thursday 5:34 PM GMT


Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Length: 1168 words
Byline: Stephen Humphreys
Body


Climate change hurts innocent people. It puts ordinary people, who for the most part have not contributed in any way to global warming, at extraordinary risk.
The IPPC's Climate Change 2014 Synthesis report makes for sobering reading when they write about the consequences of climate change: "injury and death due to more intense heat waves and fires"; floods and droughts, and a rise in "foodborne and waterborne diseases".
This risk is not just a matter of extreme weather events, such as the heatwave in Russia that took an estimated 55,000 lives in 2010 or last year's typhoon Haiyan, recording the fastest wind speeds on record. It is also the intensifying effect climate change has on other intractable global problems such as war, famine, and economic migration. Repeated hot summers contributed to a spike in droughts across Syria, for example, triggering hardship and riots that culminated in the vicious civil war now underway.
In 1992 the nations of the world entered a binding agreement to stop "dangerous anthropogenic interference" with the earth's atmosphere. In the two decades since, that obligation has failed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; quite the contrary, as levels have since soared to rates unthinkable in 1992. The United Nations Framework on Climate Change (UNFCCC), as the 1992 agreement is known, has sent a yearly caravan of politicians, activists and lawyers to some of the world's finest resorts to thrash out a binding agreement - but so far with little effect. (Hopes are still pinned on finding common ground at the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris next year).
Elsewhere, the law has had nothing to say on this important issue. The global economy is underpinned by law, but you would think it had nothing to do with climate change. Climate-related cases have been absent from international courts - even from disputes involving human rights, investment or the environment. While there have been cases heard in some national courts, particularly in the US, they do not progress far.
The weak legal response to climate change means that big polluters are getting off lightly. It is clear that 60% of proven oil reserves must be left in the ground if we are to have even a remote chance of limiting global warming to two degrees. Yet oil companies and exporters continue to drill and explore, to enjoy their assets and hedge against future losses, as though climate change were a mere financial risk rather than an existential threat to peoples' lives and livelihoods.
The world of international law is behaving as though the problem of climate change does not exist.
Investment law
A significant case was decided recently by a panel of international arbitrators in The Hague. Yukos versus Russia involved the compensation of three named shareholders in Mikhail Khodorkhovsky's former oil company, Yukos, which was driven to bankruptcy - allegedly by Russian tax policy. The case is noteworthy as it involves probably the largest arbitration award in history, at $50bn (£31.8bn).
The case is a reminder of just how much power a three-person international panel can wield over national tax policy, allowing them to take vast quantities of money from Russian taxpayers and put it into the hands of private shareholders. It is also notable for the methods by which the panel arrived at this extraordinary sum. The number represents a portion of the money the shareholders were held to have lost through sales of oil that would have been extracted between 2004 and 2011, had Yukos not been bankrupted first.
In other words, the panel ruled that between 2004 and 2011, with greenhouse gas emissions rising at record rates worldwide, those who had played a part in environmental destruction (and profited from it) should nevertheless be compensated to the tune for not having been free to produce more greenhouse gasses.
Put like this the ruling seems bizarre, but as any lawyer will tell you the panel was only ruling on the issues as presented. Both Yukos and Russia recommended the panel follow the indexed market price for oil and gas in Russia over the period, which generally rose. The overwhelming public interest in stemming climate change was absent from the proceedings and from the court's calculations. The human, social, environmental costs were irrelevant or, as economists like to say, "externalised".
International trade law
Unfortunately, the same problem also afflicts other areas of international law. One obvious policy for any state serious about addressing climate change would be to impose low carbon standards on the production of ordinary everyday goods such as meat, mobile phones, and plastics. But if you impose standards on goods at home, you must also impose them on imports or domestic industry will become uncompetitive and suffer.
Does international trade law allow states to impose low-carbon standards on imported goods? The answer is yes and no. A low or zero-carbon import policy is almost certain to violate World Trade Organization (WTO) law, but there are some exceptions. Being granted an exception is time consuming and expensive, and there is a significant risk the WTO's principal court will shut down any such a policy, regardless. No country has yet tried.
Why has the WTO not taken more proactive steps to tackle climate change? And why has the estimated $600bn (£382bn) in annual subsidies to fossil fuels never been challenged, while paltry subsidies to support renewable energy technologies have been stopped?
Human rights law
Given the self-evident harms inflicted by climate change on internationally protected human rights to health, food, water, shelter and to life itself, one might expect human rights law to provide a viable route to mount a challenge. But this has proved complicated. Many of the principal victims of climate change do not live in the countries where emissions are highest, a key feature of climate injustice. This makes it difficult or impossible to sue.
Where people directly affected by the changing climate already live in high-emitting countries such the US, Canada, Australia or the European nations, human rights may yet provide some effective relief. Litigation is beginning to happen in some of these places, but there are still significant hurdles.
Regards harm to the climate, courts are faced with lengthy and complicated causal chains that appear at first sight quite unlike the existing case law. Courts need imagination in these cases, but so far they have rarely displayed it.
                     More articles like this:                   
    • Philanthropreneurship: welcome to the new age of philanthropy
    • An economic system that supports people and planet is still possible
    • Society must call business' bluff on its fixation with profit maximisation
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts.                                            Become a GSB member                                          to get more stories like this direct to your inbox                   

Load-Date: December 16, 2014


End of Document




UK flood victims less likely to be climate sceptics; A new study finds that those directly affected by floods are more likely to agree climate change is a serious issue
The Guardian
January 29, 2015 Thursday 9:32 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 1172 words
Byline: Adam Corner
Body


Exactly one year ago, fierce winter weather was causing havoc across the UK. Large parts of the Somerset Levels were submerged, Wales had been battered by coastal storms, residents in the Thames estuary were on red-alert, and Cornwall was cut off by rail, as the line at Dawlish collapsed into the sea.
Although storms are an integral part of the great British winter, these floods were remarkable, leading the news agenda for weeks on end and causing disruption to thousands of people's lives. In a changing climate, floods like these will happen more often, and they will become more intense. But did people make the link between the flooding and climate change?
A new study released today by the Understanding Risk team at Cardiff University provides some fascinating answers to this question. In the months following the flooding, a nationally representative survey of around 1,000 people was conducted, asking about people's views on climate change, on the floods, and whether they saw a link between the two.
The results were striking. Most respondents (85%) felt that flooding had become more common, and that it would continue to get worse in the future. At the same time, scepticism about climate change was at its lowest for 10 years: very few people disputed the link between human activity and climate change.
 Related: Your brain on climate change: why the threat produces apathy, not action
Two-thirds of respondents thought the floods were a sign that the impacts of climate change were already beginning to be felt, while an even clearer majority (72%) agreed that the floods were a sign of what we should expect in the future from climate change.
As would be expected, people also pointed to other important factors (such as insufficient investment, and poor river dredging) to explain the damage caused by the flooding. But climate change featured surprisingly strongly in the mix. So did the flooding act as a trigger, focusing people's minds on the risks of climate change?
A standard survey would be unable to answer this question. Tempting as it may be to make this inference, it is crucial not to confuse correlation with causation: perhaps people who were already concerned about climate change were more inclined to make a link to the floods, rather than the other way around.
But in this study, the nationwide survey was compared to a second group who lived in one of five areas of the country that had been directly affected by the flooding. This allowed the researchers to examine the impact that "being flooded" had on people's attitudes towards climate change.
Again, the findings were striking. People who had experienced flooding were not only more concerned about climate change, but also more likely to report that they had become more concerned about climate change in the past 12 months. In the national sample, around 15% of people spontaneously named climate change as one of the three most serious issues facing the country - in the flood-affected sample, this rose to nearly 30%. When asked whether their local area was likely to be affected by climate change, 61% of respondents who had been flooded said yes, compared to only 15% of the national sample.
 Related: How framing can move climate change from scientific to social fact
It is perhaps not surprising that floods of this magnitude would leave a mark on the national consciousness. But the fact that the flooding also impacted on people's views about climate change is important. And from a communications perspective, the findings offer some crucial signposts for how to engage the public more effectively.
Firstly, events like these provide a chance to build public support for policies that will reduce climate risks in the future - provided communities are approached in a sensitive and respectful way. Climate change is a notoriously intangible risk for people to grasp. But when floods bring the problem closer to home, there is a window of opportunity for having a national conversation about climate change that is not usually open.
The survey findings also offer some guidance about what form this conversation could take. There were consistently high levels of agreement with statements about the increasing prevalence of flooding, attribution of the floods to climate change, the need to be better prepared in the future and the importance of supporting an international agreement to reduce carbon emissions.
To illustrate how these findings are relevant to public engagement, consider the following example narrative - the sort of statement that a campaigner, a policymaker or a community activist might make: "It's clear that the climate is changing - many of us have noticed the signs. In fact, after the economy, immigration and the NHS, climate change is one of the most serious issues facing the UK. Most people sense that flooding is already getting worse, and fear that it will keep getting worse in the future. The floods of 2014 show us what we can expect from climate change, but we were unprepared and understandably, people felt angry. The government should take steps to protect people from flooding in the future, by supporting an international agreement to limit carbon emissions in Paris later this year."
It is a powerful message - but every single sentence reflects the sentiments expressed by survey respondents, and draws on the exact wording of questions where there was agreement by more than 70% of those surveyed.
Because of the probabilistic and often indirect link between weather and climate, clearly worded statements about cause and effect - or confident predictions about climate impacts in the future - are often problematic for scientists to make. Data on public perceptions cannot overcome the challenges associated with the complexity of the relationship between weather and climate. But the survey findings suggest that appealing to popular opinion on the need to take climate impacts more seriously may be an effective alternative approach.
The message for politicians, campaigners and communicators is clear: scepticism is low, and concern about flood risks is high. The argument that climate change is a "vote-loser" is no longer a credible excuse for inaction.
                     Adam Corner is the research director for the Climate Outreach and Information Network (COIN), and is an honorary research fellow in the School of Psychology at Cardiff University. He was part of the research team that designed the survey described in this article.                    
                     The sustainable living hub is funded by Unilever. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled brought to you by. Find out more                                            here                                          .                   
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a                                            GSB member                                          to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.                   

Load-Date: January 29, 2015


End of Document




SA premier says 72 homes destroyed in Cudlee Creek fire as NSW blazes rage on - as it happened; PM says link between extreme weather and climate change won't change policy. Victoria and SA still under bushfire threat as NSW surveys damage. This liveblog is now closed
The Guardian(London)
December 21, 2019 Saturday 9:24 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:25
Length: 15518 words
Byline: Josh Taylor and Amy Remeikis
Body


block-time published-time 6.59am GMT 
We are going to leave the live blog there for the night. If you need updates on the fire situations: 
The CFS site is for South Australia           The VicEmergency site is for Victoria           The RFS site is for New South Wales
There are two fires at watch and act level in New South Wales: the Gosper Mountains fire and the Grose Valley fire. 
Authorities are keeping an eye on ember activity in Athelstone in South Australia from the Cudlee Creek fire.
Although conditions have been less severe today, it is expected the fires will continue without significant rainfall.
We will have updates in the morning, and in the meantime, please stay safe.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.03am GMT
block-time published-time 6.49am GMT 
enltr #Cudlee_Creek Bushfire Update - Embers from the Cudlee Creek Fire are currently falling in the Athelstone area. CFS is aware of this and crews are in the area monitoring local conditions.
- Country Fire Service (@CFSAlerts) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 6.46am GMT 
My colleague Helen Davidson  wrote this just two days ago about the effort to save Balmoral. It's so utterly devastating that almost all of the town is gone now.
block-time published-time 6.35am GMT 
AAP has some more horrific detail on the extent of the devastation in Balmoral. The town has around 150 houses and a population of 400. There is "not much left" but we don't know exactly how many homes were destroyed yet. 
AAP:
 Matthew Deeth, who's the mayor of the neighbouring Wollondilly Shire Council, says everyone knows everyone in the small village.
"They were all banding together until they got hit yesterday and they were just decimated," Deeth said on Sunday.
"Most people were pulled out of their houses and if there was nobody defending houses they kind of just all lit up."
Residents in the nearby town of Bargo, north-east of Balmoral, were counting themselves lucky on Sunday.
One house in Bargo's Ashby Close was lost to the Green Wattle Creek blaze, with fire damaging a number of other properties in the street.
 Joe Cefai, 50, said the blaze just missed his home.
Cefai, who evacuated with his two young children and a neighbour, lost a number of buildings next to his house.
"It could have been far worse," he said on Sunday. "I could have easily kissed my home goodbye. To return to see how close it did get, words can't explain."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.40am GMT
block-time published-time 6.08am GMT 
A total fire ban has been declared for tomorrow in the Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia.
enltrTOTAL FIRE BANS have been declared for 23 December 2019 in the following Fire Ban Districts: Mount Lofty Ranges - Severe refer https://t.co/NFVkbk3CU2           pic.twitter.com/FzujQkA9CS
 - Country Fire Service (@CFSAlerts) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 5.56am GMT 
enltrA view of the Grose Valley fire burning out of control in Blackheath - filmed about an hour ago from the 7NEWS helicopter. People in the area are advised to monitor the changing conditions. https://t.co/TWhlKQycs4           #NSWFires           #7NEWS           pic.twitter.com/HZUPu0fxbu
 - 7NEWS Sydney (@7NewsSydney) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 5.46am GMT 
An update on the situation in Victoria from AAP:
Bushfires in Victoria's East Gippsland have been downgraded as firefighters get a leg up on blazes thanks to milder weather conditions.
A watch and act warning remains active on Sunday for Tambo Crossing, Wattle Circle and Stirling, while the bushfire at Marthavale- Barmouth Spur is still not under control.
"Emergency services may not be able to help you if you decide to stay," the VicEmergency website states. 
Fire crews have managed to get a handle on two blazes with warnings lowered to advice across Goroke, Lawloit, Little Desert, Peronne, Burnbank, Evansford and surrounding towns. 
One of the fires, the Lexton-Ben Major bushfire in the vicinity of Mt Lonarch, has been contained after burning through 2,711 hectares, and an advice warning in place.
It comes as the temperature took a dip on Sunday with about 24C forecast in Tambo Crossing and a milder 22C in Melbourne after a top of 44C in the Victorian capital.
The bushfires have been burning since 21 November but flared up on Saturday after a cool change came through and brought dry lightning strikes.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.52am GMT
block-time published-time 5.41am GMT 
 72 homes destroyed in Cudlee Creek fire, South Australian premier says  
ABC is reporting SA premier Steven Marshall has said 72 homes have been destroyed in the Cudlee Creek fire. It is up from 15 yesterday.
A total of 404 outbuildings and 227 vehicles were also destroyed in the fire.
enltrBREAKING: Premier Steven Marshall confirms the number of homes destroyed in the #CudleeCreek fire has jumped to 72. It was 15 yesterday.            @abcadelaide
 - Stacey Lee (@Staceylee_) December 22, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.45am GMT
block-time published-time 5.38am GMT 
enltrMy aunt just sent this through. Ash piled up on the sand at Gerroa, near Gerringong in the Shoalhaven. pic.twitter.com/PiXvBzhDst
 - Kate Lyons (@MsKateLyons) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 5.19am GMT 
Here's a bit more on what the Australian defence force has been doing to help out the firefighting effort in the past day.
An aerial tanker has been provided to the NSW RFS from the RAAF base in Richmond. The HMAS Albatross has helped with water refuelling and retardant loading for the Currowan fires from the naval air station in Nowra. 
The army is also supplying personnel to prepare meals three times a day for 250 firefighters in the northern rivers region from November until mid-January. It is also assisting with transport and logistics for the RFS in Glen Innes, Kempsey, Casino, Wollondilly and in the Hawkesbury.
Helicopters and accomodation are also being supplied
You can read more about what defence is doing to help out here. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.24am GMT
block-time published-time 5.00am GMT 
enltrThe support provided by our @DeptDefence has been exceptional.            #NSWRFS aviation rescue crews have been working with Defence to check homes cut off by fires. Often removing at risk people when there is no other option. Just another side of the operation that most would never see.            pic.twitter.com/rDdSBzg2iw
 - NSW RFS (@NSWRFS) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 4.53am GMT 
I am going to leave you in the very, very capable hands of my colleague Josh Taylor  for the rest of the afternoon.
Conditions continue to be a lot better than yesterday, but that just means firefighters are having to try and use what time they have to get ahead of what is coming after that.
Please pay attention to the alerts and make sure your plan is ready. 
Thank you for following along with me today - and as always, take care of you and those around you. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.02am GMT
block-time published-time 4.42am GMT 
Journalist Royce Kurmelovs  has another update from the South Australian fires:
 James Tilbrook  coughs from the smoke inhalation as he picks through the wreckage of his Adelaide Hills vineyard.
"It's not good," James says of both the cough and the scene.
The boutique Tilbrook Estate winery and vineyard is run by James and his wife Annabelle, who fled their property on Friday morning as the Cudlee Creek fires started to burn out of control. Coming back, James says he is shell-shocked. 
"We've lost everything," he says. "Our house is on a separate property. My wife, son and our dog left at 10.30 for Mt Barker. At about 11am I had to choose between staying to defend the vineyard, or going to defend our home. I had to make that choice. The result is our house - our home - is still standing, but the vineyard's gone. We've lost our livelihood."
"Once our house was safe, I went to help a friend with his home. I figured the vineyard was toast, there was nothing I could do there, so I might as well go help friends."
As the fire swept through, James says "cooked" the decades-old vine plantings and melted the winery on the property. A neighbouring cherry orchard was also destroyed in the blaze.
"We were only a small producer, we make 1000 cases a year but all our stock was in the winery," James said. "All the barrels of our last vintage. All our wine in tanks. All the wine in the tank is still there, but it's probably cooked too.
"I got a photo of some bottles that were sitting on top of a filing cabinet and the bottles have melted or collapsed. Someone said to me that the melting point of glass is 1400 to 1600 degrees. It would have been fucking hot in there. Excuse my language."
James says the biggest problem going forward is going to be income. The couple planted their first vines on the property in 1999 and it will take years for them to recover or regrow. In the meantime, they have a multi-million dollar mortgage to pay.
"Someone told me there's a chance the vines may recover and come back," James says. "I'm usually a positive person, but I just don't know. I don't believe it."
Some friends have already set up a fundraiser for the family.
block-time published-time 4.30am GMT 
Victorian fire update, courtesy of AAP: 
Bushfires in Victoria's East Gippsland have been downgraded as firefighters get a leg up on blazes thanks to milder weather conditions. 
A watch and act warning remains active on Sunday for Tambo Crossing, Wattle Circle and Stirling, while the bushfire at Marthavale - Barmouth Spur is still not under control.
"Emergency Services may not be able to help you if you decide to stay," the VicEmergency website states.
Fire crews have managed to get a handle on two blazes with warnings lowered to advice across Goroke, Lawloit, Little Desert, Peronne, Burnbank, Evansford and surrounding towns.
    Wine bottles destroyed by fire on the Tilbrook Estate winery in Adelaide Hills, South Australia. Owners James and Annabelle Tilbrook fled their property as the Cudlee Creek fires started to burn out of control on Friday. Photograph: James Tilbrook/Facebook   
One of the fires, the Lexton-Ben Major bushfire in the vicinity of Mt Lonarch, has been contained after burning through 2711 hectares, and an advice warning in place.
It comes as the temperature took a dip on Sunday with about 24C forecast in Tambo Crossing, and a milder 22C in Melbourne, after a top of 44C in the Victorian capital.
The bushfires have been burning since November 21 but flared up on Saturday after a cool change came through and brought dry lightning strikes.
A relief centre has been set up at the Omeo memorial hall, 60 kilometres north, for people affected while generators have been set-up to restore power and services.
Hundreds of firefighters on the ground and in the air have been working across the state to contain the fires, which are concentrated in steep and largely inaccessible terrain.
People are advised to monitor the VicEmergency website. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.49am GMT
block-time published-time 4.13am GMT 
Anthony Albanese's office has just released the transcript to the press conference, which includes this line at the end: 
In terms of this crisis, I have tried to visit the Rural Fire Service headquarters ... Minister Littleproud, can I say this, has been exemplary at providing information and briefings to the opposition, but I have made a request now for days to visit the rural fire service. And that request has not been met up to this point.
That would be the headquarters Scott Morrison held his "I have returned" press conference from this morning.
From my time covering state politics in Queensland, those decisions are usually up to the state government. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.17am GMT
block-time published-time 3.45am GMT 
You can hear the terror and the frustration in this video. 
These fires - they are different. It's not just authorities saying it. It's those on the ground, the "quiet Australians" who have lived through previous seasons, but not like this.
Which is why politicians saying they've seen smoke haze in Sydney before, or that we've always had fires, or quoting Dorothea Mackellar is not good enough, on any measure. 
undltr pic.twitter.com/0rjQrduZNZ
- Simon Cotter (@SimonCotter62) December 21, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.48am GMT
block-time published-time 3.37am GMT 
enltrPM @ScottMorrisonMP has met today with Melissa and Jess - the widows of the two firefighters, Geoff Keaton and Andrew O'Dwyer, who died in the truck rollover, also spoke to their families and crew members - no photos out of respect for their grief.            @TheNewDailyAu           https://t.co/QEcDiPjvdt
 - ???????????????? ???????????? (@samanthamaiden) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 3.35am GMT 
NSW police say a man is missing in Lithgow, following a fire.
 From AAP:  NSW police say a man is missing from the rural village of Bell after a huge bushfire tore through the Lithgow area, destroying dozens of buildings.
The man in his 60 or 70s lives on a remote property in Bell and the area was engulfed in fire on Saturday, NSW police chief inspector Chris Sammut said on Sunday.
Another elderly man who had been missing from neighbouring Dargan has been located "safe and sound", the Rural Fire Service tweeted on Sunday morning.
He was found at an evacuation centre in Lithgow which was threatened by the huge Gospers Mountain megafire over the weekend.
Sammut said the man who was still unaccounted for lived on one of the remotest properties in Bell.
"He may have self-evacuated or went to stay with friends and we want the public to let us know any information they have to assist us locate this missing person," he said. 
Sammut confirmed up to five properties were burned in Lithgow on Saturday while about 30 buildings were lost in Clarence and Dargan.
Those numbers include sheds and other structures.
About 350 residential homes in Lithgow remained without power on Sunday afternoon.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39am GMT
block-time published-time 3.33am GMT 
For those who missed the prime minister's press conference, here is the beginning, including where he apologises for causing anxiety:
But I am comforted by the fact that Australians would like me to be here simply so I can be here alongside them as they're going through this terrible time. And I say to those Australians who I caused upset to, and I apologise for that. It is important I think when you [are] confronted with these things you front up and are honest with people and that is what I am seeking to do now. The time for that discussion is over. We need to focus on what is going out there today. 
enltrThe Prime Minister has conceded he caused "great anxiety in Australia" by taking a family holiday in Hawaii during a bushfire emergency pic.twitter.com/Xd7EqV7ALF
 - News Breakfast (@BreakfastNews) December 21, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39am GMT
block-time published-time 3.30am GMT 
Bits and pieces are slowly coming out of Balmoral.
enltr?? these scenes are just devastating https://t.co/WUK6Hp6yQT
 - Tegan George (@tegangeorge) December 22, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.32am GMT
block-time published-time 3.28am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese says he won't be leaving Australia this summer, and thanked David Littleproud for being "exemplary" in providing the opposition with briefings. 
In the briefing that the opposition's had this morning, there are cooler conditions expected as we're experiencing today, over the next few days, but north-western Australia is a real issue. And of course, when you have heat, that's where the heat begins. 
And it's there now and is expected to come across the country to the east coast to the more heavily populated areas over the next week. 
Around north Queensland, around Townsville, Mount Isa and in that area, is also being looked at very carefully at the moment. 
And people should bear in mind the warnings that are there if they are thinking of going on driving holidays, for example, down the south coast, they need to listen to the expert advice which is there and not take any risks. 
The first priority is keeping people safe. And I thank minister Littleproud for the ongoing briefings that he's provided, and the personal discussions I've had with him as well.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.06am GMT
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
Back to Scott Morrison's  decision to leave Australia, Anthony Albanese  says: 
I wouldn't have made the decision that he made to go - that is a matter for him and his family circumstances and it is difficult - I haven't sought during this week to, to pass judgment on that, it's a matter for his judgment. 
He chose to leave. 
He chose also to do it in a way that I think created a major issue of secrecy. 
This government has a real problem with being accountable with any scrutiny whatsoever, and the circumstances whereby Michael McCormack wouldn't say whether he was acting prime minister or not, whereby people didn't know when Scott Morrison was coming back - and even after he said he was coming back, he didn't come back and wouldn't tell the media or public when he would be returning. 
I just think this government has a problem with scrutiny and openness and it's on display all the time, over so many issues. 
I've raised this for a considerable period of time - it is part of Mr Morrison's character that when asked a question, that's just a straight question, he dismisses it, or he prevaricates, he speaks about the bubble, or he says it's just gossip and he won't provide answers to simple question whether it's in parliament or from the media. 
And I say to the media that they need to hold him to account, and we'll do our job of holding him to account in the parliament, with a whole range of issues in which he just won't provide a straight answer. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.32am GMT
block-time published-time 3.21am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese on Scott Morrison's assertion his government won't be changing its emissions reduction policy: 
Well, I just find it staggering that in the current circumstances, whereby he's sent Angus Taylor, a discredited minister, who has been misleading parliament since his first speech, to represent our nation at Madrid to try and undermine international action on climate change, including arguing for accountancy tricks rather than lower emissions. 
Australians do want action on climate change. 
The deputy prime minister yesterday said new measures were needed and a new response - and today, going from the acting prime minister to the real prime minister, we have a dismissal of the need for any action on climate change. 
The government needs to listen to the International Energy Agency head, who has said it is time for Australia to get our act together. 
And quite clearly, when it comes to climate change, the prime minister's attitude is there's nothing to see here. 
It's business as usual. 
Well if he thinks there is nothing to see her, it's because he can't see through the smoke that's coming from those bushfires.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23am GMT
block-time published-time 3.18am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese press conference  
 Anthony Albanese  on Scott Morrison's return from Hawaii. (Earlier in the week, Albanese said he would not be criticising the PM for taking leave.)
Now I note that today, Scott Morrison has returned from his holiday in Hawaii. 
It's a good thing that he is back. 
But we saw today no change in strategy with regard to the bushfires, a Coag meeting to be held next March. 
I wrote to the prime minister in November, asking him to convene Coag in November, prior to the emergency levels of the current crisis. And that was dismissed. 
We see no change to climate change policy. 
And we've seen no commitment to provide compensation to our volunteer firefighters who are giving up working and the wages that comes with that in order to help their communities, but they've still got to pay the rent, they're still going to pay their mortgages, they're still going to buy food for their families, and they are really struggling, they're fatigued. 
And there's a need for the government to look at making sure that they're properly compensated. 
So they don't have to choose between whether they continue to help out, or whether they have money to put food on the table for their families. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.34am GMT
block-time published-time 3.05am GMT 
Australian Associated Press has an update on the South Australian situation: 
Smoke from the Adelaide Hills bushfire had dropped the city's air quality rating to poor.
The Environment Protection Authority says air quality readings are improving but parts of the hills and metropolitan area remain affected by bushfire smoke.
The situation on Sunday was further exacerbated by an early morning temperature inversion layer which kept smoke low to the ground.
The EPA said anyone with health issues or concerns should stay inside with windows and doors closed. 
A watch and act warning remains in place for the blaze, with the Country Fire Service reporting some renewed fire activity within the 127km perimeter.
The fire has burnt through more than 25,000 hectares and destroyed at least 15 homes.
Before it was sparked on Friday, the Bureau of Meteorology also reported that smoke from the NSW bushfires had made its way to Adelaide.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.07am GMT
block-time published-time 3.00am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese has just held his press conference in Rozelle.
Unfortunately it hasn't been broadcast as yet, and I am in Canberra, so I will bring that to you as soon as I can.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.07am GMT
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
We are still waiting on Anthony Albanese's press conference. 
It should be soon.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.48am GMT
block-time published-time 2.28am GMT 
The smoke has officially made its way north.
enltrIt's still bad: Just dropped my son off at Alderley in Brisbane. You can just make out the skyscrapers in the Brisbane CBD through the smoke haze, 6km away. pic.twitter.com/66f6qMgFV9
 - PAUL TULLY ???? (@PaulTully) December 22, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.37am GMT
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
enltrMore devastation from the Adelaide Hills bushfire @abcadelaide?? Steve Opie            pic.twitter.com/0QZphhNAfW
 - Ben Nielsen (@benjnielsen) December 22, 2019
block-time published-time 2.15am GMT 
Which brings  Scott Morrison back in to the frame:
I think all Australians, I think, are very proud - I know the commissioner is very proud and the premier is very proud of the services that the lead. But all Australians are extremely proud of what is being done here, and in so many places around the country.
... All Australians are proud and have a great, great reason to be proud. 
This is this is Australia at its best, Australia at its best, and we thank them for it.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.21am GMT
block-time published-time 2.13am GMT 
The commissioner finishes with how proud he is of the fire services:
We've seen only tragically this week, the risk is real. 
And the consequences can be fatal. And and as a result of the events only this week, there are there are families, there are loved ones, there are wives and there are children and there are mates, who will never be the same again because of the horrendous that unfolded this week. 
I could not be any more proud, not just of the extraordinary volunteers that that I have the privilege of being the commissioner for, but the entire coordinated fire response over here in NSW, partnering with the commonwealth,
... It's a massive, huge logistical operation maintaining and sustaining more than 2,000 people per shift, day and night - the people behind the scenes of people on the front line, I could not be any more proud of the extraordinary efforts and commitment and dedication that we see following rolling out day in day out, and we know that they're going to be doing it as long as their community and the people of NSW are going to be threatened and, and all we pray for is rain. And unfortunately, we need a lot of rain to start getting some reprieve. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.15am GMT
block-time published-time 2.06am GMT 
 Balmoral fire 'really confronting to contemplate'  
 Shane Fitzsimmons on Balmoral:
Unfortunately I don't have the specific numbers - there are teams in the field today. 
 But as the premier indicated the team inside there say that it was devastating, and I think I coined the phrase "there's not a lot left or there's not much left", and that's just really confronting to contemplate and, and whether it's Balmoral or Buxton... we are talking dozens of properties, dozens of buildings.  
As a matter of fact, right across all the far grounds of the last 24 hours, we could be talking about another hundred buildings that being added to the state tally so far this season. 
That doesn't mean there's 100 homes and we need to make sure we differentiate between buildings, property and homes. 
The detailed analysis going on in the field now will seek to differentiate between what is a home, what is a house, what is a shed, and you know, and that takes some time, we need to access these areas. 
But the toll is significant. 
... There's a long way to go before we really have an understanding of the magnitude and scale of the the loss and damage here as a result of these fires.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.11am GMT
block-time published-time 2.02am GMT 
Commissioner Fitzsimmons on what is coming up: 
We've got to keep in mind that we're not expecting any rainfall to make any meaningful difference to these fires until January /February. That's still a way to go. We're still talking four to six weeks at best before we start to see a meaningful reprieve in the weather, based on the forecast are available. 
And then, as the prime minister indicated, we will want to do some very critical post-incident reviews, post-season reviews, gather the information gathered the support from firefighters and communities right across NSW. 
That will take some time. 
And the last thing we want is ad hocery or, or unnecessary reactiveness so close to the end of this season, and particularly when other states and territories are still going to have challenges heading well and truly into March. 
So they will need to be a very concerted effort to consolidate the learnings to ensure that we're hearing far and wide and formulate that into lessons and proposals in due course but it is certainly something [we] will be very much focused on. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.13am GMT
block-time published-time 2.00am GMT 
RFS commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons  on that same issue:
Fatigue management, and the drain, the relentless nature of this season is certainly taking a toll and so to is a geographic spread of the activity - you might recall for several months between July and and into September, most of the effort was really concentrated in north-east NSW, we've now got fires spreading from north-east NSW and Queensland border down to the south coast of NSW. 
Those logistical challenges, those transport and, and accommodation challenges spreading and moving people right across such a broad geographic area all add to the challenges of fatigue and crew rotation. 
Underpinning all of this is a combination of members that are in a very strong position, a very ready position to sustain ongoing efforts and support for three days, five days at a time, coming back for rest and doing another three to five days coming back from a rest. 
Not everybody can do that. There are also teams that need to maintain a local presence and our local level of fire covering case we get new fires. 
And then on days like yesterday, where we saw such a broad area affected by catastrophic forecast and unfolding in the day, devastating fires, we saw a whole, a whole bunch of people in the order of 1,000 people stand up and make themselves available to bolster that effort. 
We've got another 30 people that the prime minister met this morning in at the state headquarters that have just arrived from Canada and the United States. 
We've got commitments to see beyond that, from our interstate colleagues, and our overseas colleagues to help us with the fatigue management and the crew rotations and where appropriate, the bolstering of numbers on those difficult days. 
It is a tough challenge. It is a difficult challenge, and something that we work very closely on, and we will continue to work very closely on as we see through the balance of this season. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.05am GMT
block-time published-time 1.57am GMT 
 Scott Morrison on the fatigue volunteers are facing: 
It's obviously one of the many significant issues that the commissioner manages with this incredible volunteer fighting force that is out there. 
But I gotta tell you, one of the things that commissioner told me this morning just, again, just impressed me so much is when a call went out yesterday for extra hands. An extra thousand firefighters showed up in response to that call. A thousand.
That is just incredible. People know what's at stake and they're all making their contribution.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.05am GMT
block-time published-time 1.56am GMT 
 Scott Morrison  on the scheduled March Coag:
Well, the immediate needs as I said this morning, simply require the requests to come forward as they do through the regular meetings that are held of the fire chiefs and commissioners. 
The ministers responsible... they only met a few weeks ago. And what we need to do in March is to ensure that we deal with the recommendations that come out from many of the lessons that have come through these fires not just here in NSW, but in other states and territories as well that have been affected. 
And we look forward to receiving those proposals then, right now they are fighting fires, and we don't want them sitting around writing submissions. 
We want them [to] obviously be focused on the operational tasks they have in front of them. 
Coag has been very busy over the back end of this year, particularly dealing with a lot of the environmental issues that we've been working on and waste management which I thank the premier for her support on and will be considering those proposals. 
A lot of the ministers have been meeting through their various councils in recent weeks and months. 
And that means there will be a really good body of work that comes forward to character in March which will be in NSW and it'll be in Rooty Hill. And I'm looking forward to bring out their their wonderful new facility out there in Rooty Hill.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.00am GMT
block-time published-time 1.39am GMT 
From Australian Associated Press: 
More than 3,000 properties in the Adelaide Hills remain without power as a result of the devastating bushfire that swept through the region and continues to burn.
SA Power Networks says crews are working in a number of areas to restore electricity supply.
But it says the timeframe to have all power restored is unclear, and in some cases it could take several days depending on access and the extent of the damage.
The company said it had already identified a number of spots where trees had fallen on powerlines. 
"Anyone in fire-damaged areas is urged to keep clear of power poles and wires as there may still be some that haven't been inspected," it said. 
Among those without electricity are properties in Woodside, Lenswood, Mt Torrens, Charleston and Lobethal.
The Adelaide Hills fire has so far burnt out more than 25,000 hectares inside a 127km perimeter.
A watch and act warning remains in place for the blaze which has destroyed at least 15 homes.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.46am GMT
block-time published-time 1.23am GMT 
RFS commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons  says fire authorities don't expect any real relief in terms of conditions until well into January. 
block-time published-time 1.21am GMT 
 'There isn't much left in Balmoral,' NSW premier says  
 Gladys Berejiklian: 
Question: There's been concern in Balmoral specifically about when people will be able to get back in and see whether or not their home is still standing?
 Berejiklian: 
Look, it's devastating not knowing whether your property is standing or not. 
 Unfortunately, we have received bad news. There isn't much left [in Balmoral].  
I might ask the commissioner to add to my comments. I understand expert teams are going in on the ground in a lot of those communities today, to make full assessments and to let people know when it is safe to go back. 
Even if people have lost their properties, they still want to go back to see what's left and if there is anything they can salvage. 
We know that's part of the recovery. 
We want people to have access to their land, to their property, as soon as they can, but it has to be safe.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.39am GMT
block-time published-time 1.19am GMT 
 Scott Morrison: 
As the premier has just said, the category C assistance is being extended to the Wollondilly shire. 
That, as the premier said, includes payments for small producers and businesses of up to $15,000 and includes things like mental health support and small grants to communities in both shires to help them rebuild particularly with community resilience programs and things of that nature coming out of that fund. 
That support is going to over - around 40 local government areas around NSW at the moment. It's the same sort of support that's been provided in many other parts, say, of Queensland where they have had the fires as well in recent times. 
These programs are designed to help people with their immediate needs. 
The premier and I have agreed also this morning that those $1,000 disaster assistance recovery payments that are paid to - for each individual and the $400 that are paid for each and - each child, in a family, that will be extended to the shire as well. 
It is already in place for Wollondilly. Those arrangements will be put in place today. These things are done as a partnership. 
This is the best coordinated, the best resourced, the biggest-hearted response that I think we've seen once again here from our response to these terrible disasters.
 It is something, I think, Australians - as I said earlier today - can be be enormously proud of, seeing their country at their best.  
 That is what we have to keep focused on - allowing Australians to continue to be at their best, supporting them as they get tired and ensure that we can continue to roll out what has been an extraordinary performance from all of those who have been involved. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.24am GMT
block-time published-time 1.18am GMT 
 Scott Morrison  is called to the front - he starts with a repeated call for "kindness":
It is great to be here with you of course, your colleagues, and Angus Taylor, the local member, and Commissioner Fitzsimmons. 
Thank you, again, for the tremendous job you're doing with all of your team - all around New South Wales. 
As the premier said, it is humbling as you come and speak to families and individuals, you speak to volunteers, and you see the best of Australia on every single occasion. 
That's what we're seeing here again today. 
Friendships, neighbours looking after each other, simple kindnesses that are being extended. 
I met one wonderful, wonderful lady today from Malta. She was there with another lady, a single lady, who was finding it tough. She was looking after her. She was making sure that she gets back to her property today. She's holding her hand. That's what she's doing.
 And this is the - these are the - this is the grace, this is the kindness, that events like this need and that's what's being displayed here on the ground.  
That will continue. Not just through the ordinary everyday things that are done by members of the community off their own bat, but also by the many volunteers. 
We rightfully praise those in the RFS, but equally today we met with members of St John's Ambulance, the State Emergency Service - those who are looking after the care and welfare of animals, and others - there are so many people who stick up their hands in these times. 
We thank them very, very much for everything they are doing. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.27am GMT
block-time published-time 1.16am GMT 
Berejiklian finishes with this: 
The devastation is shocking. I have also been just literally bowled by the way the community's come together, the resilience and people's generosity.
People with not much are giving away everything they have to support others. And it's times like these when you really appreciate what New South Wales and what Australia's about.
block-time published-time 1.15am GMT 
 Gladys Berejiklian : 
So, as you know, we announced joint funding and now that joint funding is in excess of $63m across the state and extends to a dozen councils. 
These two are now part of that. 
... I also want to stress - I have mentioned this to the mayor who is here today - that $63m is on top of the $25m the New South Wales government's already set aside to get rid of hazardous materials and just to start the clean up. 
For some families, some families will be given notification they can go back to their properties, perhaps today, tomorrow. 
Other families have to wait. We want to make sure - no matter what people's circumstances - just the hope of being able to move forward is so important. 
If we pick up the tab - sometimes it costs thousands of dollars - to get the hazardous materials off the property, whether you are insured or not insured, the state government is picking up that cost to get on with rebuilding as soon as you're physically and emotionally ready to start the rebuilding process. 
As I've said, we're not just here today and tomorrow but we will be with you for the weeks and months and for some communities years.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.22am GMT
block-time published-time 1.13am GMT 
 Gladys Berejiklian  is addressing the media - she is formally announcing the additional areas who can now access the disaster relief funding.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.22am GMT
block-time published-time 1.09am GMT 
 Scott Morrison  and Gladys Berejiklian  have arrived at one of the Green Wattle creek fire evacuation centres - the Picton Bowling Club. 
About a dozen people had stayed there last night. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.10am GMT
block-time published-time 1.06am GMT 
If you haven't seen it, Lenore Taylor  has written on what she took out of Scott Morrison's  press conference. A taste: 
This isn't about an adjustment to your language, it requires an adjustment to your policy, it requires a credible policy, the kind of policy we know could benefit us economically, that business is begging you to enact so that they can invest. And we know that would mean we could fight for effective international action rather than            continue to act as a hindrance.
We know we can't solve the heating that is exacerbating this crisis on our own, so please don't insult our intelligence again with that "1.3% of global emissions" argument like you did at the start of this fire season. Given the consequences we are suffering, we should be doing everything we can, and we know that we are not.
You've just kept pretending.
You'll find the whole thing here:
 Related:  Prime minister, you need a credible climate policy. It's too dangerous to keep pretending you have one | Lenore Taylor
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.08am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
Two more areas have been given access to disaster recovery funding. From the release:
The commonwealth and NSW governments are providing another $3.5m to extend the community recovery assistance program under the Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA) to the Wingecarribee and Wollondilly LGAs.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian said this additional funding brings the total federal-state recovery fund to more than $63m.
"Having witnessed first-hand the devastation these bushfires have inflicted on locals and their communities it is vital the government act right away to provide assistance as quickly as possible," Berejiklian said.
"We have already made available support for people who are suffering personal hardship; help for people whose homes have been damaged; funding for firefighting operations and to restore damaged essential public assets; and financial support for small businesses, primary producers and non-profit organisations.
"Importantly, we are also supporting these communities to become more resilient to disasters by extending the NSW Bushfires Economic Recovery and Community Resilience Grants Program."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.09am GMT
block-time published-time 12.55am GMT 
 Victoria  Mackinlay  has published this photo of dead ladybugs washing up on Bondi beach, surrounded by ash
 View this post on Instagram
 margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px; Chunks of ash washed up on Bondi this morning laced with hundreds of ladybirds.... #bushfiresaustralia #bushfiresnsw #bushfires #bushfiresmoke #climatechange #climatechangeisreal #climateemergency #climatecrisis #climateaction #ladybird #ladybug #ash #bushfireash #bondismoke #bondi #bondibeach #bondibeachsydney #bondilove #bondilover #ashonthebeach
 color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;A post shared by Victoria Mackinlay (@victoriamackinlay) on Dec 21, 2019 at 4:48pm PST
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
enltrEMERGENCY WARNING: Grose Valley (Blue Mountains LGA) Fire activity is increasing. If you are in the Blackheath area and your plan is to leave or you are not prepared, leave now towards Katoomba. #nswrfs           #nswfires           #alert           pic.twitter.com/SChfMEvLrG
 - NSW RFS (@NSWRFS) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 12.35am GMT 
enltrHoly Moly! #NSWfires ??            pic.twitter.com/Bw8ZWTrchJ
 - Nic Paul Enache (@nicpaulenache) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 12.28am GMT 
The ACCC has responded to the National Electricity Market price report - and it is not as rosy as Angus Taylor  made out.
From the ACCC public media release:
The average annual bill for households in the National Electricity Market fell in 2018-19 compared with the previous year, by $65 or 4%, the latest ACCC electricity markets report has found.
But while average household bills fell to $1509 in 2018-19, households were still paying about 20% ($254) more than in 2007-08, and the average price for a unit of electricity drawn from the grid was about 45% higher in real terms.
"There is still work to be done to make electricity more affordable for households," ACCC Chair Rod Sims said.
"We continue to seek action on our previous recommendations, which we believe will help drive bills down."
 Further action on environmental scheme costs needed 
Environmental costs have been the biggest driving factor behind the increase in average household bills over the longer term, due to federal and state government policies aimed at encouraging greater uptake of renewable generation, promoting energy efficiency and reducing carbon emissions. Customers with solar panels made up about 16% of all residential customers in the National Electricity Market (NEM) in 2018-19, compared to 0.2 per cent in 2007-08.
Many of these policies, such as premium Feed-in Tariff (FiT) rebates, result in additional costs for retailers that ultimately flow through to customers' electricity bills, unless funded through other means. The costs of such schemes accounted for $103 or 41% of the long-term increase in household bills between 2007-08 and 2018-19.
...For example, the average household pays about $550 a year (or 9.4 cents per kWh) more than a household with solar panels, a situation the ACCC believes raises significant questions about fairness.
"The cost of installing solar panels has reduced significantly in recent years, so environmental schemes like the premium FiT rebates are no longer needed to make solar an attractive option for those households that can afford it," Sims said.
" Indeed, all customers who can, should consider how much they could save by installing solar panels. 
 "We are primarily concerned about the additional costs such schemes have imposed on households that cannot access or afford to install solar panels," Sims said. 
 "Funding environmental schemes through government budgets rather than through increased electricity charges should also be considered as a more equitable option." 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.32am GMT
block-time published-time 12.25am GMT 
A very welcome piece of good news from the NSW RFS - a missing man has been found, safe.
enltrIn some good news: A missing gentleman from the village of Dargan has been located safe and sound this morning by @nswpolice           #NSWRFS           #nswfires           pic.twitter.com/WmvwDRboe7
 - NSW RFS (@NSWRFS) December 22, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.26am GMT
block-time published-time 12.19am GMT 
 Scott Morrison  is still making his way to an evacuation centre in Picton
block-time published-time 12.18am GMT 
 South Australia fire update   
 Royce Kurmelovs  has provided an update on the South Australian fires for us:
Adelaide has woken up to the smell of smoke as a haze lingers over the city from fires burning in the Adelaide Hills and on Kangaroo Island in the south, but the South Australian CFS says it is hopeful they will have a handle on the situation in the coming days.
While the CFS is not confident enough to issue a statement on containment, cool conditions overnight have allowed fire crews to get on the front foot, with back-burning operations currently being performed in an effort to contain the Cudlee Creek fires in the northwest.
So far the blaze in that area has consumed over 25,000 hectares, destroyed homes and properties, injured lifestock and native wildlife. Two people have been confirmed dead within South Australia during the bushfires, and 26 CFS volunteers injured battling the blaze.
Road blocks remain in effect areas as fire crews are working to manage hotspots along the perimeter and are wary of flare ups in the coming week. The Bureau of Meteorology has forecast temperatures in the 30's in South Australia, with the mercury to climb as the days wind out.
Elsewhere, the "complex" series of fires on Kangaroo Island has been downgraded and is being treated as two separate fire fronts with 50 firefighters currently on the scene.
A spokesperson for the CFS said mop-up operations are expected to continue.
"We'll have fire crews on the firegrounds for quite some time. Even if we do get it contained, there'll be fire crews out there checking the ground doing mop up for a few days yet."
block-time published-time 12.17am GMT 
I've just been alerted to Scott Morrison addressing the US and Canadian fire fighters at the Sydney RFS headquarters, which was shown on Sunrise (which is why I missed it the first time).
He cracked a joke about Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau.  
Let's hope he is talking about Trudeau's love of a selfie, given the circumstances.:
We value the same things, we share the same values, that we will be will all be doing, over this period time - I will be making sure to pass on my personal thanks to prime minister Trudeau and president Trump later today. I'll get a pic and send it to them - I know Justin like his pictures. (There is laughter.) 
I'm not teasing him, I promise. We've often done that together, when we've been together. 
enltrPrime Minister Scott Morrison has just arrived at @NSWRFS HQ to be briefed on the bushfire situation.            pic.twitter.com/3oqFcUAfLY
 - Sunrise (@sunriseon7) December 21, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.23am GMT
block-time published-time 12.03am GMT 
The Grose Valley fire has been raised to "emergency".
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11am GMT
block-time published-time 12.03am GMT 
The smoke haze has hit Brisbane.
enltrAnother red sun in Brisbane. Lots of haze and smoke again. #bushfires           #weather           #brisbane           pic.twitter.com/0cWNg13ZF0
 - Lyndell Murray (@lyndellnm) December 21, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11am GMT
block-time published-time 11.44pm GMT 
 Where the fires are at right now  
As of 10:30am AEDT, here's what we know the fire situation is across Australia at the moment. 
    • In New South Wales there are five fires at watch and act level: Gospers Mountain fire, Green Wattle Creek, Grose Valley, Kerry Ridge, and Upper Turon Rd, Palmers Oaky.
    • In Victoria there are three fires at watch and act level: Tambo Crossing and Wattle Creek, Ensay and Reedy Flat and Brookville.
    • In South Australia there are still two fires burning at Duncan and Menzies on Kangaroo Island, and a watch and act in place for a fire in Cudlee Creek.
The weather conditions are a bit milder than yesterday, and there's no emergency warnings currently in place, but we will update if that changes over the course of the day.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12am GMT
block-time published-time 11.36pm GMT 
Just before Scott Morrison's  press conference, RFS commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons*  gave an update on the NSW fires: 
We have still got an enormous amount of fire burning in the landscape. Conditions are particularly dry and fire behaviour continues to be very challenging for firefighters and those areas affected by fire. 
A big focus this week, a significant focus this week, and starting today is the implications now for the entire Blue Mountains community along the Great Western Highway. 
We effectively got fire now stretching from the Darling Causeway, Lithgow area, in the western areas of the or the upper Blue Mountains, and only four, 4, 5km north of the Great Western Highway spreading all the way down to Currajong Heights, that's due north Winmalee, Springwood, which is not far the Penrith escarpment and region. 
We have seen widespread damage and destruction being reported across a number of those fire grounds and we have got impact assessment teams already deployed into the field this morning trying to gain access to those impacted fire grounds to do assessments and undertake surveys in order to identify the extent of damage and the extent of destruction. 
As we indicated last night, the reports are still indicating that we are expecting another heavy toll, unfortunately, with estimates that property loss could be in the dozens of - of buildings including homes, outbuildings, sheds and businesses. 
That damage and destruction effectively ranges from places like Lithgow, Clarence, Dargan, Bilpin, all along the Bells Line of Road, we got places down around Balmoral and out towards Buxton and Bargo down on the Green Wattle Creek fire. 
We have also got down the Currowan fire south, up in the north-west corner of that, the communities of Neriga. There's a very wide area of impact overnight and those assessments will be undertaken.
*apologies for the typo in the original post 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25am GMT
block-time published-time 11.33pm GMT 
enltrDear Prime Minister, You've asked for the nation to be kinder. Let's start with being kinder to the young generation and take the serious climate action needed to ensure they have a safe future that is not riddled with fires, pollution and no clean water? #ClimateEmergency
 - Sarah Hanson-Young?? (@sarahinthesen8) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 11.23pm GMT 
 Anthony Albanese  will be up at 1pm.
I imagine he wants Scott Morrison's  press conference to sit and marinate for a while, before he adds his two cents, given you know, the prime minister wants us all to be kinder to each other, and leave any division to the side - unless of course, you need to make your own political point.
For example:
 Scott Morrison  at the beginning of the press conference:
It is time to be kind to each other. This is not a time for division, it is not a time for argument, it is not a time for partisanship, not a time for point scoring. It is a time to support people who have an important job to do, to give them the space and time, to give them the support they need.
 Scott Morrison half way through the press conference:
I know there are some who tried to make political points and score points over these issues in the midst of these disasters and that is disappointing. 
I will do what I said I would do because that is how I am with the Australian people. I said we will meet our 26% emission reduction target. 
Emissions under this government are on average 50 million tons less than they were under the previous government. 
Emissions have fallen over the last two years. Emissions are lower than at any time they were under the previous government. 
We have had record investment in renewables in Australia and now, thankfully, as a result of policies the government has put in place if we are also getting electricity prices down, some $65 a year. 
And on top of that we are doing it without embracing the reckless job destroying and economy crunching targets that others are seeking to force upon us. I don't think that is a balanced approach. 
We will take a responsible approach to taking action on climate change.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.21pm GMT 
This 'debate' if you can call it that, given Chris Smith seems to have decided his job, now that he is returning to Sydney radio 2GB is just to yell over anyone who has a different view, or you know, the facts, sums up most of the country right now:
enltrStill gobsmacked- x https://t.co/yiCxeGiBep
 - Gretel Killeen (@gretelkilleen) December 20, 2019
block-time published-time 11.12pm GMT 
 Angus Taylor  has also decided right now is the perfect time to put out a release on electricity prices coming down: 
Residential electricity bills are coming down according to the latest Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) Inquiry into the National Electricity Market report.
The November 2019 report found:
    • a reduction in the average residential electricity retail price across the National Electricity Market (NEM) from FY2017-18 to 2018-19 of approximately 3 per cent,average annual residential electricity bills across the NEM have decreased by $65, or approximately 4 per cent,the most recent annual reduction in household bills of $65 is part of a longer-term trend that has seen bills fall by $209 in real terms since 2013-14, andaverage household bills across the NEM are at their lowest since 2013-14.
(Which we knew they would, because a butt load of renewables have come onto the grid, which was anticipated for quite some time)
block-time published-time 10.58pm GMT 
So to quickly recap that press conference:
 Scott Morrison defended leaving the country to take a holiday (which he said he planned six weeks ago), having "made a promise to my kids" but said in hindsight, he would have made a different decision. (Morrison was due to return to work, as scheduled, tomorrow, December 23, according to what his office told the New Daily's Samantha Maiden last week).
I am sure Australians are fair-minded and understand that when you make a promise to your children you try and keep it, but as prime minister you have other responsibilities and I accept that and I accept the criticism and that is why Jenny and I agreed it was important that I returned, particularly after the tragedies we saw late this week. 
I get it that people would have been upset to know that I was holidaying with my family while their families were under great stress. 
They know that I will not stand there and hold a hose. I am not a trained firefighter nor am I an expert like those in the next room doing an amazing job. 
 But I am comforted by the fact that Australians would like me to be here simply so I can be here alongside them as they go through this terrible time.  
He has "learnt lessons" including about how his office dealt with the media:
I understand there is media interest in the engagement of briefings between my office and the gallery and those sorts of things, I get that. There have been lessons learned this week and they will be imported and included next time.
After pointing back to the one comment he made in February linking climate change to worsening disasters "among other factors" for the majority of this (early) bushfire season, Morrison made an explicit point of joining the dots
There is no argument, in my view, or the view of the government, and any government in the country, about the links between broader issues of global climate change and weather events around the world - but I'm sure people would equally acknowledge the direct connection to any single fire event is not a credible suggestion to make that link.
But there will be NO change to Australia's emissions reduction policy under his government. 
People can expect my government to do what it promised to do, what it took to the last election. I know there are some who tried to make political points and score points over these issues in the midst of these disasters and that is disappointing. I will do what I said I would do because that is how I am with the Australian people. I said we will meet our 26% emission reduction target. 
Morrison also believes the time to talk about his holiday is in the past, and the time to talk about climate change is not now.
This is not a time for division, it is not a time for argument, it is not a time for partisanship, not a time for point scoring. 
It is a time to support people who have an important job to do, to give them the space and time, to give them the support they need. 
... Australians know we need to rally together. The time for argument is not now. It is not to say there is no time to talk about climate change, of course there is and we are talking about it. 
But let's do it in a way that does not distract from the very immediate need of protecting people's lives, protecting their property, honouring those who are out there doing everything they can. 
And so I simply ask people, particularly this Christmas time, to reflect on that, to come together to support each other and to focus on the things we need to do now and on the other side of these fires, Australia will prevail. We always will.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.45pm GMT 
On whether he believes he has shown leadership, Scott Morrison says:
This has been going on for a long time, since September, and on each occasion I have been here, whether it is in Taree or out at Wilberforce a couple of weeks ago.
Not on all occasions have I gone and been there with a travelling media team. 
I have been there on occasions just in a low-key way, talking to those in incident control rooms, and it would seem that whether it is myself or others there will always be criticism made but what I have confidence in and have always had confidence in is in the fair mindedness of the Australian people. 
As I said for I take responsibility for my own decisions and I take responsibility for those I made in relation to my family and, more broadly, in terms of my leadership responsibility for the nation and that is why I am here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.44pm GMT 
On Labor's proposal for tax breaks for volunteer firefighters who are unable to work while they deal with the bushfire emergency: 
 Q: Labor wants compensation for volunteer firefighters. Is that something you are considering?
 Scott Morrison: 
I don't know what the specific proposal being proposed ... 
I will take that where it is. 
But these are things that the government has been considering, in the first instance these are matters for state governments. The RFS and the fire services around Australia are run by state governments so it is not for the commonwealth to step in and make decisions. 
But these are things that I think can be contemplated. 
But I very much want to do that in consultation with state and territory governments. 
As I said to the commissioner today, whatever they need, whatever they think they need to bolster support, sustain the operations that they are running, they simply need to ask. 
And they will get that support. 
 I think there are immediate issues that need to be addressed there with the rural firefighters, particularly as they get into areas of terrible fatigue now. 
... They have been fighting fires for a while now and they are still going. Thankfully, as I was briefed this morning, those parts of the state are more under today than they were when I was there not that long ago. 
 But these are the many issues that I think we need to understand. Let's not forget, there are 210,000 rural firefighters around the country, and there are thousands of surf-lifesavers who will be patrolling our beaches, those who are volunteering on meals on wheels and carers and others.  
Australia is a magnificent country because it does have that volunteer spirit. And Australia relies on them and they should be celebrated and we do so. 
And where there are ways that we can further support that volunteer effort, we are very open to considering this. 
Let me say one thing, all our firefighters are professionals. They are all professional at what they do. 
They are well-trained and they are very good at what they do. One of the things we focused on this morning was ensuring how we can better supplement the clearing work and the other things that need to be done in those areas that have been ravaged by fires and ensure that we can get even more prompt defence support into those arrangements. 
There has been defence liaisons in these ... there has been in Queensland other places, and I am sure we can get some ... at local level as well through the state government. 
The defence forces being deployed in those, defence force members who are firefighters, are out there fighting fires, just like any other employee would be. 
They are not in their platoons, they are in their brigades.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.40pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison  on why the government is not considering changing its climate change policy:
The Kyoto targets set by the previous Labor government, when we came to government, there was the projection that we would miss those by some 700 million tonnes. 
Now we're going to beat them ... And I would hope that not only will we meet, and I'm sure we will, our Paris commitments, that we will beat them as well. 
And there is a long time between now and 2030 and we will continue to refine our policies because we're about taking action. 
 But what we will not do is act in a knee-jerk or crisis or panicked mode. A panic approach and response to anything does not help.  
 It puts people at risk. Not just their livelihood but if you walk out there into the control room you will not see people panicking, you will see people be very professional, very focused on the job they have, talking to each other in a very professional way and getting the job done.  
Government is the same thing. Whether it is taking action on climate change or ensuring that, as the midyear economic statement shows, that the government is on track to achieve a surplus or the further job creation that is all over the last week. 
Over 100,000 jobs created since last election. 
You get these results by being calm and by being stable. 
And having clear goals and having the policies in place to achieve them. Whether that is on taking action on climate change or job creation or ensuring that we get the welfare system targeted to support those who need it most or dealing with the environmental challenges of waste management and plastics and any of these issues, mental health issues, the government is addressing them.
On all these issues the government has clear plans and a clear approach to deal with them and is doing it in a very patient and in a very applied and professional way.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.38pm GMT 
 No change in climate policy - Morrison  
We get back to climate policy - there will be NO change.
Q: The government has been criticised for using carryover credits. Going forward after these fires, how can your government provide a more genuine commitment to making Australia a responsible global actor when it comes to reducing carbon emissions?
 Scott Morrison: 
People can expect my government to do what it promised to do, what it took to the last election. I know there are some who tried to make political points and score points over these issues in the midst of these disasters and that is disappointing.  
I will do what I said I would do because that is how I am with the Australian people. I said we will meet our 26% emission reduction target. 
Emissions under this government are on average 50 million tonnes less than they were under the previous government. 
Emissions have fallen over the last two years. Emissions are lower than at any time they were under the previous government. 
We have had record investment in renewables in Australia and now, thankfully, as a result of policies the government has put in place we are also getting electricity prices down, some $65 a year. 
And on top of that we are doing it without embracing the reckless job destroying and economy crunching targets that others are seeking to force upon us. 
I don't think that is a balanced approach. We will take a responsible approach to taking action on climate change. 
We are taking action and we will continue to take action. We are part of a global action on the commitments we have made, we are meeting. 
We are meeting and we are beating. So I do not accept the suggestion that Australia is not carrying its weight. We are carrying our weight. 
We are meeting and beating our target and there are very few countries who can say that.
 Q:  You said you have learned some lessons from this past week. What are they? 
 Morrison:  I think I have already outlined that in my earlier remarks.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.34pm GMT 
Question: You were critical of the Victorian police commissioner when she went to dinner during the Black Saturday bushfires.
 Scott Morrison:  
I have already made a number of comments today, as you know, where I think I have held myself to that same standard. 
Equally I would note that I am not the operational leader of an emergency service or police force. I am the prime minister. And as prime minister I was kept regularly and sought to be kept regularly updated on the events. 
The acting prime minister was in full control of what was it occurring ably supported by Minister Littleproud. 
The premier was leading, obviously the governments of the operational response here in New South Wales, and I have been in contact with the premier [regularly] on these arrangements ...were in place to ensure that I could continue to do and fulfil my responsibilities, but I understand and the reason I have returned is out of a deep respect and sympathy for those Australians who were tragically killed a few nights ago. 
That demanded my attendance here, I believe, out of simply respect and sympathy for them and what they were going through and that is why I have been pleased to return. 
That is a decision that Jenny [and I made] and we told the kids about it and Australians are fair-minded. 
They know at the end of a difficult year people go on leave and they know that when a dad makes a promise to the kids they like to keep it. 
 And events late last week are not where they were today so I think it would be unfair to say the events in very recent days were the same as a week or so ago. 
Nevertheless, I understand the anxiety and my people have been upset at this and that is why I am pleased to be back.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.32pm GMT 
This is not exactly a glowing defence of the deputy prime minister.
Q: Why were questions referred to your office; why couldn't McCormack simply say he was acting?
Morrison: 
These are not the matters I am focused on now, I will leave those matters for others.
Australians are worried about the fires and the support necessary to support those out there today. 
I understand there is media interest in the engagement of briefings between my office and the gallery and those sorts of things, I get that.
There have been lessons learned this week and they will be imported and included next time.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.31pm GMT 
Question: But you knew about these catastrophic fire conditions. Are you sorry to the residents?
 Morrison: I already said that. I already said it.
Q: Do you believe that the release of the information about this was handled poorly and the public needed to know?
 Morrison : The deputy minister was the acting prime minister and each time I have taken private family leave as prime minister I followed exactly the same process. There was no change. 
On my earlier leaves no statement was issued. I took private family leave and no objections were raised by the press on those occasions but it is something we will rectify.
(No one knew he was leaving the country).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.30pm GMT 
Question: Where have you been and why the secrecy?
 Scott Morrison: I was in Hawaii, a trip with my family, a trip planned seven weeks ago and when I take family leave, it is a private family time. 
block-time published-time 10.29pm GMT 
And then the prime minister asks us to all be kind to each other: 
Let me finish by saying this, and I apologise for the lengthy nature of my remarks this morning, it is time to be kind to each other. 
This is not a time for division, it is not a time for argument, it is not a time for partisanship, not a time for point scoring. 
It is a time to support people who have an important job to do, to give them the space and time, to give them the support they need. 
If people have something they want to contribute, that is fantastic and I want to thank all those who turned up to fire stations and made donations and you may want to think of dropping off some toys for the children of the firefighters who may not have had time to go out and buy some this Christmas because they have been too busy. 
These are things that people can do constructively. Australians, we need to rally together. 
The time for argument is not now. It is not to say there is no time to talk about climate change, of course there is and we are talking about it. 
But let's do it in a way that does not distract from the very immediate need of detecting people's lives, protecting their property, honouring those who are out there doing everything they can. 
And so I simply ask people, particularly this Christmas time, to reflect on that, to come together to support each other and to focus on the things we need to do now and on the other side of these fires, Australia will prevail. We always will. 
Australia is the most amazing country on earth. 
How do I know that? 
Because I see what is happening out there right now on those fire front and in the communities that have suffered terrible loss. 
That is why Australia is the best country in the world and that is the country I am proud to lead. 
 know we all support in the cause which we all rally now and focus on supporting efforts of Australians.
block-time published-time 10.27pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison says he believes Australians are "fair minded" and will understand why he took his holiday. 
Two other points. I have returned from leave and I know that has caused some great anxiety in Australia and Jenny and I acknowledge that. If we had your time over again and the benefit of hindsight we would have made different decisions. 
I am sure Australians are fair-minded and understand that when you make a promise to your children you try and keep it that as Prime Minister you have other responsibilities and I accept that and I accept the criticism and that is why Jenny and I agreed it was important that I returned, particularly after the tragedies we saw late this week. I get it that people would have been upset to know that I was holidaying with my family while their families were under great stress. 
They know that I will not stand there and hold a hose. I am not a trained firefighter nor am I an expert like those in the next room doing an amazing job. 
 But I am comforted by the fact that Australians would like me to be here simply so I can be here alongside them as they go through this terrible time.  
And so to those Australians who had [cause for upset] and I apologise for that. 
I think it is important when you confronted with these things you front up and are honest with people and that is what I am seeking to do now. 
The time for that discussion is over. We need to focus on what is going out there today. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.25pm GMT 
And then we move on to power prices:
We must take action on climate change and we are taking action on climate change. At the last election I said we would, I said we would meet and beat our Kyoto targets, I said we would meet our Paris commitments at a canter and we will. 
 We welcome the record investment in renewable energy technologies and at the same time we welcome the fact we pursue our climate policies while getting electricity prices down as the ACCC noted today with a $65 reduction as a direct result of the policies in place to get power bills under control in this country.  
And we will do it without destroying the economy or jobs. We will do it with sensible target to get the balance right. 
That is what I promised Australians when we went to the last election and that is what I am committed to doing. 
We are not going to beat our Paris target "in a canter". Emissions are still rising in Australia and have every year since 2014, when the carbon charge was scrapped by the Coalition. 
block-time published-time 10.23pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison on the climate change link debate:
I appreciate that when things get as anxious as they have become, then people will think, you know, what's been prepared? Is anything happens? 
Or have they thought of this? I understand that those anxieties are positively meant and are natural. 
But I want to reassure you that this- our officials, our commissioners, our firefighters, both those professionals who are paid and those who are unpaid, they are doing this year-round to prepare for events just like this. 
And that is why this response is something where we're seeing the best of Australia, not the contrary. Flowing on from that public anxiety, there is also been other issues that have been raised, not just about the response and the resources which I think I have addressed, but also around issues of climate policy. 
It is also been the case - our Government has always and I have always acknowledged the connection between these weather events and these broader fire events and the impacts globally of climate change. 
It's one of many factors as I have said. The drought conditions have certainly been a big contributor in terms of the dryness of the fuel load. 
There are also many other issues as you would be well aware and they'll all come under scrutiny as we prepare for what needs to happen next time - issues of management in national parks of fuel loads, issues of back-burning and managing native vegetation and building codes and all of these sorts of things, ensuring our communications programs are important. 
I mean, there are some fires that have been started by just carelessness. Others sadly have been the result of direct arson. Many have been created by dry lightning strikes. 
And understanding all of that it will be important as we move through to the next phase. 
There is no argument, in my view on the view of the government, and any government in the country, about the links between broader issues of global climate change and weather events around the world but I'm sure people would equally acknowledge the direct connection to any single fire event is not a credible suggestion to make that link. 
block-time published-time 10.21pm GMT 
He moves on to the anxiety he says he sees the community dealing with:
In talking to the Commissioner, I want to acknowledge what he has acknowledged - and that is as we face these fires at the moment, I want to assure Australians of this because I know people are anxious and I know people in some places are rightly fearful of what is literally at their door, and the haze and the smoke and all of these things heighten that anxiety as you think about your kids and your family and your can see the red tinge at night if you're close enough, but our fire services in Australia are the best in the world. 
The response to these disasters, these fires, is the best in the world. 
This is a time when Australia should be very, very proud that we have the best-resourced, most-coordinated, best-equipped fire services of any nation on earth to deal with this. 
And that's because as a country, we're used to dealing with fires - admittedly and very rightly this season is much more lengthened and started a lot earlier and there isn't the respite rains that we can expect any time soon and that is making this season harder than we have seen in a long time. 
But it is also true that after every fire, we sit down, we learn the lessons and we make sure we're better prepared next time and that's what's happened on this occasion. 
The coordination is seamless between not only the states and the Commonwealth, but between the states and overseas jurisdictions as well. 
Our defence forces are deploying wherever they're called upon and particularly now as you look at the burnt-out vast territories across particularly here in New South Wales, but in other states as well, there is wreckage to clear, there are trees to remove, there is access that needs to be provided to people's properties and businesses and homes, and that's the work that our defence forces can, are and will continue to play and they have been doing it since September - airlifting, ensuring they're providing night flights for recognisance, and providing that heavy support that is backing in and complementing the amazing work of our firefighters. 
There's some 70,000 firefighters here in New South Wales alone. That's bigger than the entire of our defence forces and reserves. 
So we're talking about an enormous force that has drawn together here in New South Wales and that's about a third of the national force. So they will continue to get everything that they need and I have run through some matters this morning with the Commissioner and I have been speaking to the Premier as well - there will be a COAG meeting in March  and at that meeting, as always, I have already put on the agenda the response capabilities for future disasters and lessons, of course, will be learned by these responses but I do know the response you're seeing right now is informed by how this work has gone on each and everyday since the last fire. 
I mean, emergency management Australia which is the Commonwealth agency responsible for our engagement, both in drawing in the ADF and the other systems of support, including the important income support, later today I'll be announcing with the Premier further disaster assistance payments into new areas of affected areas as three payments have been rolling out. 
block-time published-time 10.17pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison moves into addressing the issues which have exploded since he left on his holiday: 
There are over 100 fires active in New South Wales today and many of those are quite serious, but I do remind people that there are also severe fires in South Australia and in Victoria. 
I spoke to the South Australian Premier last night when I arrived back in Australia to get an update and there's been loss of life there and there are fears for others. 
We have heard further news this morning of people missing, an individual missing out in Lithgow where the fires also have raged overnight. 
No-one wants to be out there fighting these fires, no-one wants these fires to be happening at this time. 
But when those fires do occur, as they have for a very long time in this country, then those who have - there's over 200,000 of them in Australia - who have signed up and put their hand up to be there to defend their communities, then they go out and they do this work and they do it on behalf of all of us and they're getting tired and they're getting fatigued because this has been going for a very long time and this is one of the key issues I have been in discussion with the Commissioner about thismorning and also with the Premier and I know that Minister Littleproud, who joins me here and I thank him for that, David, and the work you have been doing, and the Deputy Prime Minister during my absence, we will continue to look at all of these issues as we go forward. The New South Wales Rural Fire Service and all the fire services across Australia will continue to get everything they need from the Commonwealth. 
As you know, the operational response to these disasters is delivered and is run at a state level, but with great Commonwealth support. 
block-time published-time 10.15pm GMT 
Scott Morrison continues: 
A few months ago I was up in Canungra when the first of these dreadful fires started to appear. 
...When we got out to Wilberforce just a few weeks ago up in Queensland and here we are again today following the terrible tragedy that occurred earlier this week.
 Andrew O'Dwyer and Geoffrey Keaton. Their families, Lisa and their little daughter Charlotte, 19 months. Jessica and their 19-month-old son, Harvey. 
When our volunteers go out there, they do it for so many reasons, but I can't help but thinking that one of the most important things that inspires them is their love of family - family is community and they're out there defending their community on that fateful night. 
And Jenny and I my heart broke when he heard of their terrible loss and their great sacrifice and I just want to extend to them our great sympathies, our love and support. 
They're getting tremendous support from their Rural Fire Service family out there at Horsley Park and from the broader families of the firefighting communities around the country. 
What we, the rest of us, can offer them is our honour, our acknowledgment, and our respect for what they have done for all of us.
block-time published-time 10.09pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison addresses the media  
 Scott Morrison: 
...Men and women who are out there today here in New South Wales who were out there yesterday, the thousands of men and women around Australia, not just here in New South Wales, up in Queensland, down in South Australia where it's also been a difficult week, down in Victoria, all those that have come from other states - Tassie, the west, the ACT, up in the Territory. 
I want to thank those who have come from overseas - the Americans, the Canadians, our Kiwi cousins, those who have come to support us in this hour of need. 
I particularly want to thank Commissioner Fitzsimmons and the amazing team he leads here in New South Wales and for the opportunity to be briefed this morning. 
I want to commend the Premier, who I have been speaking to over the course of the last week, and for the tremendous job she's been doing with her team here in New South Wales to respond to this disaster, this threat, that is ongoing and has been going for many, many months now. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.04am GMT
block-time published-time 10.06pm GMT 
The prime minster is now addressing the media.
block-time published-time 10.06pm GMT 
If you can, you should watch this with the sound on. The firefighters all remain so calm, despite what they are facing. The "got this" at the end just sums up everything about how our volunteers are handling this.
enltrThis incredible video was taken by firefighters in the early hours of this morning on Hat Head Rd at #Blackheath, when the fire burnt out of the valley threatening homes.            #nswrfs           #nswfires           pic.twitter.com/r85ccBIEeF
 - NSW RFS (@NSWRFS) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 10.00pm GMT 
The prime minister will head to Picton after the Sydney RFS briefing, to meet with evacuees. 
block-time published-time 9.58pm GMT 
Here is what the government has spent:
Australia's aerial firefighting force has been given an $11m funding injection from the Morrison government amid growing concern about the resourcing of firefighters combating the bushfire crisis.
On Thursday the federal government announced it would nearly double the commonwealth's annual contribution to the National Aerial Firefighting Centre, which coordinated the 140 aircraft used to battle fires across Australia.
"In response to the request from our national fire chiefs we're backing our firefighters and our water-bombing fleet with an extra $11m boost," the prime minister, Scott Morrison said in a statement.
"That's on top of the $15m we already deliver each year for aerial firefighting to tackle what has already been a devastating fire season."
block-time published-time 9.57pm GMT 
enltrJust a reminder... if you don't like the air quality in Sydney, the expansion in coal mining, gas and the drought have combined to make this a daily occurrence in the Hunter Valley. The health outcomes for Hunter residents will be very poor. History won't be kind here ?? https://t.co/zE3SIRMHut
 - Mike Cannon-Brookes ????????? (@mcannonbrookes) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 9.57pm GMT 
There is a lot of commentary over how prepared Australia was for this bushfire season. The fire authorities said they did all the preparations they could - including hazard reduction burns, but the group of former fire chiefs who came to prominence at the beginning of this season (which started early) said they wanted to talk about how to prepare for this new normal.
 Paul Karp has found Labor's bushfire policy from the election, given this debate. 
The bushfire season in Australia is lengthening and already overlapping with the northern hemisphere, increasing the risk that we won't be able to access the aircraft we need at times of peril. 
At the same time, the Federal Government's contribution to the National Aerial Firefighting Centre has plummeted from 50 per cent of funding to just 23 per cent, reducing our overall firefighting capability. 
The Bureau of Meteorology has identified this summer as Australia's hottest on record, which included devastating bushfires in Victoria and Tasmania. Now is the time to invest in giving our firefighters the resources they need to keep us all safe.
Labor's national firefighting package will deliver:
 $80 million to establish the National Aerial Bushfire Fighting Fleet of aircraft 
It will include retro-fitted Black Hawk helicopters as they are phased out from active use by the Australian Army and Erickson S-64 Air-crane helicopters (or 'Elvis' as they are commonly known) which has a 2,650 gallon tank capable of snorkelling or scooping fresh or salt water. 
It's expected that the national fleet will include a standing capability of up to six Large or Very Large Air Tankers, and up to 12 heavy rotary wing helicopters.
 Australia's first 'smokejumper' units 
Smokejumpers are firefighters trained to be rapidly deployed by helicopters at remote fires during the short window during which those fires can be contained.
Smokejumpers usually rappel from helicopters and use chain-saws, hoes and other dry firefighting tools to establish a containment perimeter around the fire. They then patrol the perimeter to ensure the fire does not jump containment lines while working with water-bombing aircraft to ensure the contained fire is fully extinguished.
 $21 million for the National Aerial Firefighting Centre (NAFC) 
A Shorten Labor Government will stop the Federal Government's reduction in funding for our firefighting capabilities by returning to a 50-50 funding split between the states and territories and the Commonwealth.
block-time published-time 9.52pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison's return to Australia last night has brought him back on deck a day before he was scheduled back to work - the PMO told reporters, including Samantha Maiden, that Morrison would be back to work on Monday, late last week 
enltrNo, his office said yesterday Monday Dec 23
- ???????????????? ???????????? (@samanthamaiden) December 19, 2019
block-time published-time 9.41pm GMT 
At least one person died in the Adelaide Hills fire which blazed last night, with another reported missing. More than 50 people have been injured - including 23 firefighters and two police officers. At least 15 homes have been destroyed, with about 30 other structures having also been consumed by the fire.
But with residents only returning to take stock of the damage today, the number of structures destroyed is expected to rise. 
The government has announced the disaster recovery payment has been extended to South Australia.
Claims will be open from Monday 23 December 2019. For more information or to make a claim visit www.humanservices.gov.au/disaster or call 180 22 66.
block-time published-time 9.35pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison has not yet addressed the media - but here is what he had to say to the RFS at Sydney headquarters. 
enltrPM @ScottMorrisonMP has addressed fire fighters at the            @NSWRFS headquarters.            https://t.co/TWhlKQycs4           #NSWFires           #auspol           #7NEWS           pic.twitter.com/8nVkBrcl8n
 - 7NEWS Sydney (@7NewsSydney) December 21, 2019
block-time published-time 9.33pm GMT 
 Mike Bowers  was at the Green Wattle Creek fire last night.
Here is some of what he saw
    RFS crews fight a fire at the Green Wattle Creek fire near Bargo NSW tonight as it starts to rain. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      RFS crews celebrate the rain Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      RFS crews fight a fire at the Green Wattle Creek fire near Bargo NSW Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      
block-time published-time 9.21pm GMT 
 Good morning  
Good morning. It is another day of watch and wait as fire fighters across the east coast and south Australia keep a very, very close eye on what 
Emergency-level fires have swept across parts of New South Wales and South Australia, and the death toll and number of injured firefighters has risen, as the country's severe heatwave and bushfire crisis continued on Saturday.
Two people were confirmed dead in South Australia, and homes were destroyed and communities evacuated in what authorities described as "an awful day" in which fires raged across three states, even creating their own thunderstorms in some parts of NSW.
At Lithgow, about two hours' drive west of Sydney, residents were forced to flee as fires threatened the community of more than 10,000 people and destroyed several homes on the outskirts of the town. At 7pm, a person was reported unaccounted for in the Dargen area, near Lithgow, the ABC reported.
Four firefighters in NSW were treated for heat exhaustion on Saturday, the ambulance service said, while another firefighter was reportedly injured after being struck by a truck in Richmond.
 Scott Morrison has returned to Australia - he flew in late last night. 
He is starting the day with a briefing with the New South Wales rural fire service headquarters in Sydney.
block-time published-time 9.21pm GMT 
AAP have the morning update: 
An elderly man whose home was consumed by flames remains missing and dozens of properties have been damaged or destroyed by bushfires which raged during heatwave NSW conditions on Saturday.
Rural Fire Service commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons described the day as "awful" for firefighters, with up to 20 homes lost to the immense Gospers Mountain fire northwest of Sydney alone.
At least two more properties were razed near Batemans Bay on the south coast, and others at Balmoral southwest of Sydney.
Southerly winds moving upstate on Saturday evening fanned flames in new directions and caused erratic fire behaviour, before creating cooler conditions for the 3000 firefighting and emergency personnel in the field.
A fire-generated thunderstorm also formed over fires in the Shoalhaven.
With forecasts predicting close to a week of advantageous conditions across NSW, Mr Fitzsimmons said his crews would 'make hay'.
Tougher conditions would likely return later in the week or next weekend.
Two total fire bans will nevertheless be in place on Sunday in the Northern Slopes and North Western regions, under "very high" fire danger.
"Our big focus is on trying to consolidate and establish containment lines across as many fire grounds as we can. We have significant fire spread south of the Bells Line of Road and through the valley system such as the Grose Valley in the Blue Mountains," Mr Fitzsimmons told reporters.
"So we will be looking at what are the options, what are the fall-back lines and at what point do we start implementing very significant strategies to secure protection for an impending threat to the Blue Mountains, particularly the communities along the Great Western Highway."

Load-Date: December 23, 2019


End of Document




Shorten finds his voice on climate change - and even Warren Entsch sings along; The Labor leader's message is that climate change is the ultimate symbol of Australian politics being broken
The Guardian(London)
May 3, 2019 Friday 9:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Katharine Murphy
Body


Let's start this weekend up north, in Cairns, with a story about the Liberal Warren Entsch and the Greens.
People watching the campaign will know the Coalition has been characterising the Greens as extremists as part of an entirely unsubtle false equivalence exercise to give them political cover for doing preference deals with Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson.
Entsch, the Liberal incumbent in the north Queensland seat of Leichhardt, either didn't get the "Greens will never darken our door" memo, or if he did he ignored it, because he's sending preferences their way.
They haven't reciprocated, they are putting Labor first, but Entsch, who is said almost universally to be in trouble in this contest, told me this week climate change is such a potent issue in his neck of the woods that it would have been self-defeating for him to do anything other than make the gesture.
In the last election, 20% of Greens preferences came his way, he says, because he is socially progressive - he was one of the leaders of the push to legalise same-sex marriage - and, as he puts it with typical bluntness: "I'm a committed conservationist. I am not a climate change denier."
Climate change in Entsch's part of the world is divisive locally because tourism operators are in conflict with anti-fossil fuel activists obsessed with the health of the Great Barrier Reef, but whatever the nuances and conflicts, it's a front-of-mind preoccupation of his constituents.
The zeitgeist is different in central Queensland, where LNP incumbents believe they are pulling the contest back from Labor in marginal seats by campaigning in support of coal. A feeling of buoyancy has been around since the opening week of the campaign, and it hasn't shifted, although MPs are nervous about what happens when Labor and the unions turn the money on for the final, brutal, fortnight. But up north, and in the south-east corner, and in the southern states, sensibilities are different.
Let's continue to follow our breadcrumb trail south. Here's what happened, minus the noise and distraction of the daily battles: various candidates exploded, Labor and Liberal; contention thundered about            Clive Palmer and his preference tie-up with the Liberals ; and Bill Shorten            decided to go for broke on climate change.
Now let's thread these things together, because if we do that, we can see the various connections matter.
The Liberal candidates who exploded this week did so in unhelpful locations - Victoria, which is the most vulnerable region in the country for the Liberals, and            Tasmania, where the Liberals have eyes on marginal seats in the north.
Victoria is the Coalition's maximum vulnerability point, because if they lose too many seats in the state to Labor on 18 May - and the risk of that is substantial - that's it. It's game over. Bye bye. There is no viable path to victory.
The errant Liberals were bundled out with haste because the views they expressed underscored negative perceptions about the party. The party in Victoria right now does not need their representatives presenting as homophobic, or saying crazy things about Muslims - not in the most progressive state in the country, where voters are already worried that a party of government is vulnerable to takeover by ultra-conservatives and rightwing fringe dwellers.
It's exactly the wrong message in the wrong place at the wrong time, because it plays to a pre-existing concern at large in the community. And there's further trouble too, with a revelation far-right ringleader Neil Erikson was one of three extremists who attended a "conservative recruitment event" for the LNP at a private residence on the Gold Coast last year.
Cue the Nationals leader Michael McCormack, who didn't help by saying breezily mid-week that it was fine for Nationals to do preference deals with One Nation because there was an alignment between the two parties. Not only was that a dumb message for Nationals trying to hold their ground in what looks like a burgeoning bush boilover, it was a deeply dumb message for Melbourne.
Adding to that, we can add controversy about the Palmer tie-up. That preference deal is potentially a lifeline for the Coalition in the parts of Queensland where incumbents are feeling comfortable. It could help the LNP hold their marginals and gain the Labor-held seat of Herbert. That's why the Liberals held their nose and did it.
But it's not necessarily a plus elsewhere.
Given the Liberals potentially gain advantage in Queensland courtesy of the deal, Labor has been absolutely determined this week to ensure that whatever is gained in those seats is netted out by problems caused elsewhere. Labor has busted out the foghorns to rail against the Palmer deal in the southern states, casting it as symptomatic of government chaos and dysfunction and abject desperation.
So while Labor was nudging chaos and "you know they are just rightwing crazies who hang out with other rightwing crazies" down the campaign hill, hoping to build a giant snowball to flatten obstacles in its path, Bill Shorten found his voice on climate change, which is the rallying point for progressives in Australia.
The Labor campaign decided this was the week to go for broke on climate change. Possibly it was a coincidence that Shorten found his voice on this at a point in the campaign when the Liberals had suffered a setback in Victoria, and Labor was looking shaky in central Queensland coal country, in part because of the Palmer pincer movement - but I very much doubt it.
It looked like making a choice to build support where your opponents are vulnerable. It looked like getting off the fence.
Shorten also broadened his message beyond the specifics of policy. He said climate change was the ultimate symbol of Australian politics being broken.
Shorten's pitch was politics is busted and it won't be fixed until the parliament faces up to the challenge of climate change, and you know Labor will keep taking this issue seriously, and you know the other side can't, because they've been killing themselves over it for a decade.
That bit of narration was the sound of multiple circles being squared: voter concern about climate change - the highest it's been since 2007; voter disaffection with the state of Australian politics - visceral, and ubiquitous; the most significant negative issue for the Liberals - perceptions that the government is chaotic and hostage to external forces that make the Canberra circus worse and stymie progress.
So after a preamble of several weeks, the 2019 election campaign finally arrived at its focal point.
Shorten, who can't be presidential because he's not popular with voters (a message you hear right around the country), has to build an institutional case for changing the government.
He has to make the argument that things can't remain as they are, and he has to find the right constellation of resonant or salient issues that tell that story, at the time voters are tuning in. Labor is still fine-tuning its formula, but that's the objective.
Morrison knows it, so he's doing everything in his power to hammer the costs of making a change. It's all he can talk about - all the reasons you can't trust Labor, why it's risky to change the government.
Morrison needs to keep talking up Shorten's negatives to try to prevent Labor from gaining momentum as the campaign moves to the business end, but the Liberal leader is beginning to face pressure, for the first time in the contest, about being an empty vessel - a vulnerability that is becoming as obvious as the nose on Morrison's face.

Load-Date: May 3, 2019


End of Document




Australia scrubbed from UN climate change report after government intervention; Exclusive: All mentions of Australia were removed from the final version of a Unesco report on climate change and world heritage sites after the Australian government objected on the grounds it could impact on tourism
The Guardian
May 26, 2016 Thursday 10:50 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 887 words
Byline: Michael Slezak
Body


Every reference to Australia was scrubbed from the final version of a major UN report on climate change after the Australian government intervened, objecting that the information could harm tourism.
Guardian Australia can reveal the report "World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate", which Unesco jointly published with the United Nations environment program and the Union of Concerned Scientists on Friday, initially had a key chapter on the Great Barrier Reef, as well as small sections on Kakadu and the Tasmanian forests.
But when the Australian Department of Environment saw a draft of the report, it objected, and every mention of Australia was removed by Unesco. Will Steffen, one of the scientific reviewers of the axed section on the reef, said Australia's move was reminiscent of "the old Soviet Union".
No sections about any other country were removed from the report. The removals left Australia as the only inhabited continent on the planet with no mentions.
Explaining the decision to object to the report, a spokesperson for the environment department told Guardian Australia: "Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism."
As a result of climate change combined with weather phenomena, the Great Barrier Reef is in the midst of the worst crisis in recorded history. Unusually warm water has caused 93% of the reefs along the 2,300km site to experience bleaching. In the northern most pristine part, scientists think half the coral might have died.
The omission was "frankly astounding," Steffen said. 
 Related:  Coalition's Queensland dam bonanza 'threatens Great Barrier Reef'
Steffen is an emeritus professor at the Australian National University and head of Australia's Climate Council. He was previously executive director of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme, where he worked with 50 countries on global change science.
"I've spent a lot of my career working internationally," Steffen said. "And it's very rare that I would see something like this happening. Perhaps in the old Soviet Union you would see this sort of thing happening, where governments would quash information because they didn't like it. But not in western democracies. I haven't seen it happen before."
The news comes less than a year after the Australian government successfully lobbied Unesco to not list the Great Barrier Reef in its list of "World Heritage Sites in Danger".
The removals occurred in early 2016, during a period when there was significant pressure on the Australian government in relation to both climate change and world heritage sites.
At the time, news of the government's science research agency CSIRO sacking 100 climate scientists due to government budget cuts had just emerged; parts of the Tasmanian world heritage forests were on fire for the first time in recorded history; and a global coral bleaching event was beginning to hit the Great Barrier Reef - another event driven by global warming.
The environment department spokesperson told Guardian Australia: "The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism."
The report said the case studies were chosen partly because of their geographic representation, their importance for tourism and the robustness of evidence around the impact of climate change on them.
A recent study found the conditions that cause the current bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef was made at least 175 times more likely by climate change and, on the current trajectory, would become the average conditions within 20 years.
 Related:  Great Barrier Reef: advisers call for cap on farm pollution
Without mentioning the Great Barrier Reef, the report notes: "Research suggests that preserving more than 10% of the world's corals would require limiting warming to 1.5C or less, and protecting 50% would mean halting warming at 1.2C (Frieler et al. 2012)."
The full statement from the environment department said: 
 The World Heritage Centre initiated contact with the Department of the Environment in early 2016 for our views on aspects of this report.  The department expressed concern that giving the report the title 'Destinations at risk' had the potential to cause considerable confusion. In particular, the world heritage committee had only six months earlier decided not to include the Great Barrier Reef on the in-danger list and commended Australia for the Reef 2050 Plan. The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism. It is the world heritage committee, not its secretariat (the World Heritage Centre), which is properly charged with examining the status of world heritage sites. Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism. The department indicated it did not support any of Australia's world heritage properties being included in such a publication for the reasons outlined above. The Department of the Environment conveyed these concerns through Australia's ambassador to UNESCO. The department did not brief the minister on this issue." 

Load-Date: May 26, 2016


End of Document




Australia scrubbed from UN climate change report after government intervention; Exclusive: All mentions of Australia were removed from the final version of a Unesco report on climate change and world heritage sites after the Australian government objected on the grounds it could impact on tourismRevealed: Guardian Australia has obtained the Unesco report Australia didn't want the world to see. Read it now
The Guardian
May 27, 2016 Friday 2:31 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 887 words
Byline: Michael Slezak
Body


Every reference to Australia was scrubbed from the final version of a major UN report on climate change after the Australian government intervened, objecting that the information could harm tourism.
Guardian Australia can reveal the report "World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate", which Unesco jointly published with the United Nations environment program and the Union of Concerned Scientists on Friday, initially had a key chapter on the Great Barrier Reef, as well as small sections on Kakadu and the Tasmanian forests.
But when the Australian Department of Environment saw a draft of the report, it objected, and every mention of Australia was removed by Unesco. Will Steffen, one of the scientific reviewers of the axed section on the reef, said Australia's move was reminiscent of "the old Soviet Union".
No sections about any other country were removed from the report. The removals left Australia as the only inhabited continent on the planet with no mentions.
Explaining the decision to object to the report, a spokesperson for the environment department told Guardian Australia: "Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism."
As a result of climate change combined with weather phenomena, the Great Barrier Reef is in the midst of the worst crisis in recorded history. Unusually warm water has caused 93% of the reefs along the 2,300km site to experience bleaching. In the northern most pristine part, scientists think half the coral might have died.
The omission was "frankly astounding," Steffen said. 
 Related:  Coalition's Queensland dam bonanza 'threatens Great Barrier Reef'
Steffen is an emeritus professor at the Australian National University and head of Australia's Climate Council. He was previously executive director of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme, where he worked with 50 countries on global change science.
"I've spent a lot of my career working internationally," Steffen said. "And it's very rare that I would see something like this happening. Perhaps in the old Soviet Union you would see this sort of thing happening, where governments would quash information because they didn't like it. But not in western democracies. I haven't seen it happen before."
The news comes less than a year after the Australian government successfully lobbied Unesco to not list the Great Barrier Reef in its list of "World Heritage Sites in Danger".
The removals occurred in early 2016, during a period when there was significant pressure on the Australian government in relation to both climate change and world heritage sites.
At the time, news of the government's science research agency CSIRO sacking 100 climate scientists due to government budget cuts had just emerged; parts of the Tasmanian world heritage forests were on fire for the first time in recorded history; and a global coral bleaching event was beginning to hit the Great Barrier Reef - another event driven by global warming.
The environment department spokesperson told Guardian Australia: "The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism."
The report said the case studies were chosen partly because of their geographic representation, their importance for tourism and the robustness of evidence around the impact of climate change on them.
A recent study found the conditions that cause the current bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef was made at least 175 times more likely by climate change and, on the current trajectory, would become the average conditions within 20 years.
 Related:  Great Barrier Reef: advisers call for cap on farm pollution
Without mentioning the Great Barrier Reef, the report notes: "Research suggests that preserving more than 10% of the world's corals would require limiting warming to 1.5C or less, and protecting 50% would mean halting warming at 1.2C (Frieler et al. 2012)."
The full statement from the environment department said: 
 The World Heritage Centre initiated contact with the Department of the Environment in early 2016 for our views on aspects of this report.  The department expressed concern that giving the report the title 'Destinations at risk' had the potential to cause considerable confusion. In particular, the world heritage committee had only six months earlier decided not to include the Great Barrier Reef on the in-danger list and commended Australia for the Reef 2050 Plan. The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism. It is the world heritage committee, not its secretariat (the World Heritage Centre), which is properly charged with examining the status of world heritage sites. Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism. The department indicated it did not support any of Australia's world heritage properties being included in such a publication for the reasons outlined above. The Department of the Environment conveyed these concerns through Australia's ambassador to UNESCO. The department did not brief the minister on this issue." 

Load-Date: May 27, 2016


End of Document




Australia scrubbed from UN climate change report after government intervention; Exclusive: All mentions of Australia were removed from the final version of a Unesco report on climate change and world heritage sites after the Australian government objected on the grounds it could impact tourism
The Guardian
May 26, 2016 Thursday 9:27 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 874 words
Byline: Michael Slezak
Body


Every reference to Australia was scrubbed from the final version of a major UN report on climate change after the Australian government intervened, objecting that the information could harm tourism.
Guardian Australia can reveal the report "World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate", which Unesco jointly published with UNEP and the Union of Concerned Scientists on Friday, initially had a key chapter on the Great Barrier Reef, as well as small sections on Kakadu and the Tasmanian forests.
But when the Australian Department of Environment saw a draft of the report, it objected, and every mention of Australia was removed by Unesco.
No sections about any other country were removed from the report. The removals left Australia as the only inhabited continent on the planet with no mentions.
Explaining the decision to object to the report, a spokesperson for the environment department told Guardian Australia: "Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism."
As a result of climate change combined with weather phenomena, the Great Barrier Reef is in the midst of the worst crisis in recorded history. Unusually warm water has caused 93% of the reefs along the 2,300km site to experience bleaching. In the northern most pristine part, scientists think half the coral might have died.
The omission was "frankly astounding," said Will Steffen, who was one of the scientific reviewers of the axed section on the Great Barrier Reef.
 Related:  Coalition's Queensland dam bonanza 'threatens Great Barrier Reef'
Steffen is an emeritus professor at the Australian National University and head of Australia's Climate Council. He was previously executive director of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme, where he worked with 50 countries on global change science.
"I've spent a lot of my career working internationally," Steffen said. "And it's very rare that I would see something like this happening. Perhaps in the old Soviet Union you would see this sort of thing happening, where governments would quash information because they didn't like it. But not in western democracies. I haven't seen it happen before."
The news comes less than a year after the Australian government successfully lobbied UNESCO to not list the Great Barrier Reef in its list of "World Heritage Sites in Danger".
The removals occurred in early 2016, during a period when there was significant pressure on the Australian government in relation to both climate change and world heritage sites.
At the time, news of the government's science research agency CSIRO sacking 100 climate scientists due to government budget cuts had just emerged; parts of the Tasmanian world heritage forests were on fire for the first time in recorded history; and a global coral bleaching event was beginning to hit the Great Barrier Reef - another event driven by global warming.
The environment department spokesperson told Guardian Australia : "The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism."
The report said the case studies were chosen partly because of their geographic representation, their importance for tourism and the robustness of evidence around the impact of climate change on them.
A recent study found the conditions that cause the current bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef was made at least 175 times more likely by climate change and, on the current trajectory, would become the average conditions within 20 years.
 Related:  Great Barrier Reef: advisers call for cap on farm pollution
Without mentioning the Great Barrier Reef, the report notes: "Research suggests that preserving more than 10% of the world's corals would require limiting warming to 1.5C or less, and protecting 50% would mean halting warming at 1.2C (Frieler et al. 2012)."
The full statement from the environment department s copied below.
 The World Heritage Centre initiated contact with the Department of the Environment in early 2016 for our views on aspects of this report.  The department expressed concern that giving the report the title "Destinations at risk" had the potential to cause considerable confusion. In particular, the world heritage committee had only six months earlier decided not to include the Great Barrier Reef on the in-danger list and commended Australia for the Reef 2050 Plan. The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism. It is the world heritage committee, not its secretariat (the World Heritage Centre), which is properly charged with examining the status of world heritage sites. Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism. The department indicated it did not support any of Australia's world heritage properties being included in such a publication for the reasons outlined above. The Department of the Environment conveyed these concerns through Australia's ambassador to UNESCO. The department did not brief the minister on this issue. 

Load-Date: May 26, 2016


End of Document




Australia scrubbed from UN climate change report after government intervention; Exclusive: All mentions of Australia were removed from the final version of a Unesco report on climate change and world heritage sites after the Australian government objected on the grounds it could impact tourism
The Guardian
May 26, 2016 Thursday 9:09 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 874 words
Byline: Michael Slezak
Body


Every reference to Australia was scrubbed from the final version of a major UN report on climate change after the Australian government intervened, objecting that the information could harm tourism.
Guardian Australia can reveal the report "World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate", which Unesco jointly published with UNEP and the Union of Concerned Scientists on Friday, initially had a key chapter on the Great Barrier Reef, as well as small sections on Kakadu and the Tasmanian forests.
But when the Australian Department of Environment saw a draft of the report, it objected, and every mention of Australia was removed by Unesco.
No sections about any other country were removed from the report. The removals left Australia as the only inhabited continent on the planet with no mentions.
Explaining the decision to object to the report, a spokesperson for the environment department told Guardian Australia: "Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism."
As a result of climate change combined with weather phenomena, the Great Barrier Reef is in the midst of the worst crisis in recorded history. Unusually warm water has caused 93% of the reefs along the 2,300km site to experience bleaching. In the northern most pristine part, scientists think half the coral might have died.
The omission was "frankly astounding," said Will Steffen, who was one of the scientific reviewers of the axed section on the Great Barrier Reef.
 Related:  Coalition's Queensland dam bonanza 'threatens Great Barrier Reef'
Steffen is an emeritus professor at the Australian National University and head of Australia's Climate Council. He was previously executive director of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme, where he worked with 50 countries on global change science.
"I've spent a lot of my career working internationally," Steffen said. "And it's very rare that I would see something like this happening. Perhaps in the old Soviet Union you would see this sort of thing happening, where governments would quash information because they didn't like it. But not in western democracies. I haven't seen it happen before."
The news comes less than a year after the Australian government successfully lobbied UNESCO to not list the Great Barrier Reef in its list of "World Heritage Sites in Danger".
The removals occurred in early 2016, during a period when there was significant pressure on the Australian government in relation to both climate change and world heritage sites.
At the time, news of the government's science research agency CSIRO sacking 100 climate scientists due to government budget cuts had just emerged; parts of the Tasmanian world heritage forests were on fire for the first time in recorded history; and a global coral bleaching event was beginning to hit the Great Barrier Reef - another event driven by global warming.
The environment department spokesperson t0ld Guardian Australia : "The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism."
The report said the case studies were chosen partly because of their geographic representation, their importance for tourism and the robustness of evidence around the impact of climate change on them.
A recent study found the conditions that cause the current bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef was made at least 175 times more likely by climate change and, on the current trajectory, would become the average conditions within 20 years.
 Related:  Great Barrier Reef: advisers call for cap on farm pollution
Without mentioning the Great Barrier Reef, the report notes: "Research suggests that preserving more than 10% of the world's corals would require limiting warming to 1.5C or less, and protecting 50% would mean halting warming at 1.2C (Frieler et al. 2012)."
The full statement from the environment department s copied below.
 The World Heritage Centre initiated contact with the Department of the Environment in early 2016 for our views on aspects of this report.  The department expressed concern that giving the report the title "Destinations at risk" had the potential to cause considerable confusion. In particular, the world heritage committee had only six months earlier decided not to include the Great Barrier Reef on the in-danger list and commended Australia for the Reef 2050 Plan. The department was concerned that the framing of the report confused two issues - the world heritage status of the sites and risks arising from climate change and tourism. It is the world heritage committee, not its secretariat (the World Heritage Centre), which is properly charged with examining the status of world heritage sites. Recent experience in Australia had shown that negative commentary about the status of world heritage properties impacted on tourism. The department indicated it did not support any of Australia's world heritage properties being included in such a publication for the reasons outlined above. The Department of the Environment conveyed these concerns through Australia's ambassador to UNESCO. The department did not brief the minister on this issue. 

Load-Date: May 26, 2016


End of Document




Five ways that people frame climate change debates; The way climate change discussions are framed shapes everything from who's held accountable to what actions we take. Here's how to spot some common frames and where we might go next.
The Guardian
February 24, 2015 Tuesday 6:45 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 966 words
Byline: Laurence and Alison Matthews
Body


Words are powerful. The word 'consumer', for example, isn't just an innocent part of the language: it triggers a frame - a set of assumptions about what you should think and how you should behave. 
Inside this frame, your job as a consumer is simply to choose between different options available to you for consumption. You might not realise that you have no say over what choices were put on the menu: that's outside the frame.
Framing happens in all sorts of contexts, from obesity to economic growth. Spotting frames is an invaluable skill because noticing a frame opens the door to looking outside it, where new and innovative ideas may be lurking.
 Related: Communicating sustainability is a subtle attempt at doing good
In the case of climate change, framing abounds as CEOs, politicians, NGOs and many more besides vie to frame the debate to suit their agendas - not always with the best environmental outcomes in mind. But even when their intentions are good, they can remain unknowingly trapped in frames.
With this in mind, here are five frames to help build your framespotting skills:
1. Responding to climate change
 Climate change is a defining issue of our age. Our response will define our future - UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon at the UN Climate Summit, New York, 23 November 2014 
True, but there's a danger in talking about responses to climate change: it frames climate change as something out there that's just 'happening'. In this frame our role is to respond to it - by building flood barriers, say. Asking whose fault it is, or what can be done to stop it, falls outside the frame.
Staying in this frame is like rearranging deck-chairs on a sinking ship instead of fixing the hole in the hull. In other words, it doesn't tackle the problem. We don't have to respond to climate change; we have to stop causing it.
2. Efficiency is the name of the game
 The government is working at home and abroad to... reduce greenhouse gas emissions by investing in low-carbon energy sources, improving fuel standards in cars and increasing energy efficiency wherever possible - Department of Energy & Climate Change website
At least we're talking about tackling the cause now, and looking at reducing emissions. Or are we? Do greener cars bring down carbon emissions?
Well no, not necessarily. There's a frame here focusing on the wrong thing. The efficiency frame looks at emissions per car, but ignores the number of cars. Greener cars may simply encourage more of us to buy them and to travel further, causing more emissions, not fewer.
We need a cap on total emissions so that this rebound effect can't happen.
3. Tackling emissions
 In the European Union, we've agreed that by 2030 we will reduce our greenhouse emissions by at least 40% compared to 1990 levels - German chancellor Angela Merkel at the Lowy Institute for International Policy, Sydney, 17 November 2014 
That's more like it. So how do we do this? Of course, the starting point is to tackle the emissions from cars, planes, power stations, and the like. Or is it? What's the frame here?
 Related: Science won't win over the climate change sceptics - we need stories
Suppose you had a garden hose connected to a sprinkler. If you wanted to save water, would you try to block up holes in the sprinkler? Of course you wouldn't; you'd simply turn off the tap a bit. By controlling the fossil fuels coming into the system (the tap), we can automatically control the emissions created further down the line (the sprinkler). This would be simpler, cheaper and would focus attention on the root cause of emissions: the extraction of fossil fuels.
4. The cost of taking action
 Businesses are realising that the cost of inaction is greater than the cost of action - CEO of Unilever Paul Polman at the Grantham Institute for Climate Change's Annual Lecture, Imperial College London, 7 April 2014 
Calls for action are growing - but still frame action as a cost or burden that will hamper business and act as a drag on the economy. The 'green means austerity' frame is widespread, equating a green future with 'returning to living in caves' mentality - in other words, taking a step back.
But is it true? We gave up slavery, but we're immeasurably richer now than the slave owners ever were.
And step outside the economics frame for a minute. Are we seriously saying cost is the deciding factor when it comes to preserving our planetary life-support systems?
5. An international problem
 No nation is immune, and every nation has a responsibility to do its part - US President Barack Obama at the University of Queensland, Australia, 15 November 2014 
Most people unthinkingly accept the frame that sees the world as a collection of countries. Attention immediately focuses on national statistics, national commitment and negotiations between nations. Global policy becomes inter-national policy.
What might lie outside this frame? What about a single, worldwide solution for the planet as a whole? Wouldn't it galvanise the debate if the Paris talks later this year ditch the national posturing and game-playing in favour of a unified, transparent system, and then rallied support for it?
National governments will resist global solutions, since each government wants to control what happens in its own country, but global emergencies need global action. After all, we're not dealing with international warming.
    • Framespotting by Laurence and Alison Matthews is published by IFF Books.
                     The rethinking prosperity hub is sponsored by DNV GL. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled "brought to you by". Find out more here.                   
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.                   

Load-Date: February 24, 2015


End of Document




Tony Abbott still lives in the 18th century on climate change, says Labor; Opposition climate change spokesman Mark Butler says prime minster is more concerned with awarding knighthoods than tackling global warming
The Guardian
January 27, 2015 Tuesday 5:59 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS
Length: 531 words
Byline: Shalailah Medhora
Body


Tony Abbott is "living in the 18th century" when it comes to tackling climate change, Labor has said, after the release of a new report warning that Australia's temperatures could rise substantially in coming decades.
                     Modelling by the national science agency the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology has predicted average temperatures in Australia could rise by more than 5C by 2090.
It warned that the "business-as-usual" approach of burning fossil fuels will contribute to soaring global temperatures.
Labor's climate change spokesman, Mark Butler, criticised Abbott for focusing on the issue of knighthoods which he said "doesn't reflect national priorities".
"Instead of indulging his strange personal fascination with the British royals ... Tony Abbott would have been much better served spending some time on a serious climate change policy," Butler said on Tuesday.
"But we know Tony Abbott still lives in the 18th century and refuses to join the rest of us to face this challenge."
The Greens leader, Christine Milne, said potential changes in climate will derail plans for Australia's future.
"Australia's future is grim in the climate sense," Milne said in Hobart on Tuesday. "All the projections they [the government] want to talk about - about the economic growth, about food and agribusiness - will come crashing down unless we get serious about global warming."
The Climate Institute has urged the government to invest more in decarbonisation and improve environmental resilience.
The head of the institute, John Connor, said: "This new data reinforces earlier analysis for Treasury that showed large chunks of the Australian economy will be whacked by global warming."
"Under scenarios of unchecked or part-checked pollution, sectors like agriculture, health, and ecosystems are hit well beyond their ability to adapt."
"This shows starkly how deep pollution reductions and decarbonisation of the economy is squarely in Australia's national interest," Connor said. "This needs to be the guiding principle in the government's decision this year on Australia's post-2020 pollution reduction targets."
The Australian Conservation Foundation warned that "some parts of Australia could become uninhabitable".
"These projections show Australia will suffer more extreme heat and drought, having massive implications for agriculture, tourism, water supply and liveability," Victoria McKenzie-McHarg, the foundation's climate change program manager, said. "The number of hot days in the country is set to increase substantially."
"It makes you wonder what it will take to get the federal government to take this issue seriously," McKenzie-McHarg said.
"This year must become the year our government starts to play a constructive role in the global effort to tackle climate change."
A spokesman for Ian Macfarlane, the industry minister, said: "The Australian government is committed to tackling climate change and is delivering strong, effective and practical action through its direct action plan and $2.55 bn emissions reduction fund.
"Unlike Labor, the Coalition is tackling climate change without a painful carbon tax that hurts Australian pensioners, families and businesses."

Load-Date: January 27, 2015


End of Document




G20: Reality bites for coal and climate change; Climate change almost forgotten in the cocoon of a coal sponsored energy forum in Brisbane
The Guardian
November 13, 2014 Thursday 11:35 AM GMT


Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1538 words
Byline: Graham Readfearn
Body


In the corporatised and coal-company sponsored cocoon of a pre-G20 talkfest in Brisbane, the burst of vocal protest came like a sudden jolt of the reality of life outside.
" Peabody - we don't want your coal," came the loud but brief interlude from seven young climate change campaigners who rose to their feet to shout down Glenn Kellow, the chief operating officer of Peabody Energy, the world's biggest privately owned coal company.
The chants bounced around the ornate auditorium of Brisbane city hall for only 30 seconds or so, before the group joined hands and walked out into the scorching Brisbane sun.
Peabody Energy, the world's biggest privately-owned coal company, was the sole sponsor of the Global Café energy event, plugged by organisers Brisbane Marketing as a chance to explore the challenges of powering the economies of the world.
Kellow, based in St Louis but originally from Australia, was in the middle of yet another pitch from the coal industry arguing their product is the "cheapest" and best way to get electricity to the 1.2 billion people in the world who currently don't have it. He avoided the phrase "climate change".
As I've written before, coal's concern for the world's poor is either a sudden onset of benevolence or a cynical ploy to use people's genuine concern over poverty to sell more of their product.
Outside the entrance to the city hall, others from the Australian Youth Climate Coalition were handing out an open letter, co-signed by youth climate groups from 30 different countries. The letter reads:
 We are compelled to write this letter because we believe that the coal lobby, led by Peabody Energy (the largest coal company in the world), is trying to unduly influence the outcome of the G20 Summit. Their agenda represents a threat to young people and future generations, and we urge you to listen to our message over that of vested interests. They claim that their industry will benefit the world's poor. But we know that the rapid expansion of the industry will cost those living under the poverty line their health and clean air - and they are also the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 
The AYCC produced a video mocking some of the claims made by Peabody Energy, coal industry figures and Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott.
Climate science denial
When The Guardian's Suzanne Goldenberg visited Peabody Energy's North Antelope Rochelle mine in Wyoming, the world's biggest coal mine, getting the company to talk about climate change seemed to be an exercise in getting blood from a black lump of fossil fuel.
When Goldenberg eventually did extract a statement from the company's corporate communications boss Viv Svec, she was told the company regarded climate change as a "modelled crisis" and that there was "still far more understanding that is required" to justify any concerns over the impacts of carbon dioxide emissions.
Svec said: "Climate concerns are a threat, to the extent that they lead to policies that hurt people".
The company's latest Annual Report is just as dismissive of the position held by every major science academy in the world, that CO2 is causing climate change and that this is a problem.
The report describes the impacts of coal combustion on climate change as being only "perceived". The report says:
 Concerns about the environmental impacts of coal combustion, including perceived impacts on global climate issues, are resulting in increased regulation of coal combustion in many jurisdictions and unfavorable lending policies by government-backed lending institutions and development banks toward the financing of new overseas coal-fueled power plants, and interest in further such regulation and policies, which could significantly affect demand for our products. 
That's a long-winded way of saying firms like Peabody Energy are seeing some writing on the wall for their industry while at the same time dismissing the entire field of climate-related science and its related disciplines as mere "perceptions" rather than reality.
Bjorn Lomborg
Danish political scientist Dr Bjorn Lomborg, of the US based Copenhagen Consensus Center think tank, was also on Peabody Energy's bill at the Brisbane event (curiously neither Brisbane Marketing, Peabody Energy or the think tank itself have been willing to disclose who asked Dr Lomborg to attend ).
Lomborg also advocates that the world's poor need "cheap" fossil fuels and thinks that the world has many more important problems to face than climate change.
It is no secret that the cost of renewable energy technologies has been dropping like several sacks of stones.
John Connor, CEO of The Climate Institute who spoke in opposition to Lomborg, remarked that he was the "token carbon offset" in a line up of speakers dominated by fossil fuel industry figures.
He told the audience that analysts were already predicting that large scale solar power would be "cheaper than coal in China and India within the next five to ten years" and that wind energy was already "at parity with new coal in India".
In a later press conference, I asked Lomborg if there was a risk that by pushing fossil fuel power stations that last up to 40 years onto developing countries you effectively lock-in the world's poor to expensive electricity (even before you factor in the costs of the impacts of climate change or health problems that come from burning the coal). Lomborg said:
 Right now the [International Energy Agency] estimate that even by 2040 sub-Saharan Africa will get somewhere between two and four per cent of its energy from renewables... sorry from new green energy. They will unfortunately get about 30 to 35 per cent from wood and dung which they definitely shouldn't be getting. It seems a good bet that if you want to help the world's poor you should get them on more power now and to a very large extent that's going to be fossil fuels. 
Lomborg is referring here to "primary energy" - that's everything from oil for cars and generators to wood burned on fires to coal burned in power plants.
The International Energy Agency has just released a report on what it thinks will be happen to the energy mix in sub-Saharan Africa under its "new policies scenario". Lomborg's figures seem to be out of date.
The IEA says that in the year 2040, some 47 per cent of all energy in sub-Saharan Africa will come from burning biomass (wood, dung, coal etc) which it hopes will be burned in more efficient cookstoves that will reduce the health costs and deaths from indoor air pollution. Lomborg had this figure at 35 per cent.
By 2040, coal's share of primary energy actually drops from 18 per cent to 15 per cent. Oil provides 17 per cent of energy, gas about 11 per cent and renewables about nine per cent (almost six per cent of this is from 'new green energy' such as solar and wind with the rest coming from hydro power).
But here's the real kicker.
The IEA says its scenario for Africa is "broadly consistent" with global warming of between 3C and 6C for the continent by the end of this century with a wide array of dangerous and some might argue catastrophic impacts (some of which the IPCC says the continent would be powerless to adapt to).
What seems clear then is that the International Energy Agency's "new policies scenario" is not particularly appetising for Africa.
Big emitters strike deal
But back to Brisbane.
Within minutes of the brief protest from youth climate campaigners, there was another injection of reality.
News began filtering through of the deal between the leaders of the world's top two emitters of greenhouse gases - the United States and China.
The US would cut its emissions by between 26 and 28 per cent by 2025 and China promises its emissions will peak and start to fall by the year 2030 - all in the name of limiting global warming to 2C (whether these cuts are enough is questionable, with early analysis from one respected team of climate analysts suggesting even deeper cuts will be needed).
Inside the cocoon of an event where the main sponsors don't accept that human caused climate change is even real, the news from Beijing seemed to further outline how rapidly the world could change - whether the coal industry likes it or not.
As for this weekend's G20 Leaders Summit, Australia Prime Minister Tony Abbott has been coming under pressure to find a place for climate change in the discussions.
If the issue is raised behind the closed-doors sessions, then it will be against Abbott's wishes. Gone also, apparently, are discussions about cutting fossil fuel subsidies that have featured at previous G20 meetings (a new report finds G20 countries are subsidizing exploration for coal, oil and gas to the tune of US$88 billion a year - between $2.9 billion and $3.5 billion from Australia).
The contents of the glossy G20 "delegate publication" reveals much about how the hosts want world leaders to see the future.
In 158 pages of adverts, sponsored features, ministerial forewords and articles from academics and think tank fellows, there's a barrage of impenetrable corporate management speak concerned with "growth", "free trade" and "economic governance".
The phrase "climate change" appears only four times. The first two pages are devoted to an advert for the mining industry.

Load-Date: November 13, 2014


End of Document




G20: Reality bites for coal and climate change; Climate change almost forgotten in the cocoon of a coal sponsored energy forum in Brisbane
The Guardian
November 13, 2014 Thursday 8:35 PM GMT


Copyright 2014 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1538 words
Byline: Graham Readfearn
Body


In the corporatised and coal-company sponsored cocoon of a pre-G20 talkfest in Brisbane, the burst of vocal protest came like a sudden jolt of the reality of life outside.
" Peabody - we don't want your coal," came the loud but brief interlude from seven young climate change campaigners who rose to their feet to shout down Glenn Kellow, the chief operating officer of Peabody Energy, the world's biggest privately owned coal company.
The chants bounced around the ornate auditorium of Brisbane city hall for only 30 seconds or so, before the group joined hands and walked out into the scorching Brisbane sun.
Peabody Energy, the world's biggest privately-owned coal company, was the sole sponsor of the Global Café energy event, plugged by organisers Brisbane Marketing as a chance to explore the challenges of powering the economies of the world.
Kellow, based in St Louis but originally from Australia, was in the middle of yet another pitch from the coal industry arguing their product is the "cheapest" and best way to get electricity to the 1.2 billion people in the world who currently don't have it. He avoided the phrase "climate change".
As I've written before, coal's concern for the world's poor is either a sudden onset of benevolence or a cynical ploy to use people's genuine concern over poverty to sell more of their product.
Outside the entrance to the city hall, others from the Australian Youth Climate Coalition were handing out an open letter, co-signed by youth climate groups from 30 different countries. The letter reads:
 We are compelled to write this letter because we believe that the coal lobby, led by Peabody Energy (the largest coal company in the world), is trying to unduly influence the outcome of the G20 Summit. Their agenda represents a threat to young people and future generations, and we urge you to listen to our message over that of vested interests. They claim that their industry will benefit the world's poor. But we know that the rapid expansion of the industry will cost those living under the poverty line their health and clean air - and they are also the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 
The AYCC produced a video mocking some of the claims made by Peabody Energy, coal industry figures and Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott.
Climate science denial
When The Guardian's Suzanne Goldenberg visited Peabody Energy's North Antelope Rochelle mine in Wyoming, the world's biggest coal mine, getting the company to talk about climate change seemed to be an exercise in getting blood from a black lump of fossil fuel.
When Goldenberg eventually did extract a statement from the company's corporate communications boss Viv Svec, she was told the company regarded climate change as a "modelled crisis" and that there was "still far more understanding that is required" to justify any concerns over the impacts of carbon dioxide emissions.
Svec said: "Climate concerns are a threat, to the extent that they lead to policies that hurt people".
The company's latest Annual Report is just as dismissive of the position held by every major science academy in the world, that CO2 is causing climate change and that this is a problem.
The report describes the impacts of coal combustion on climate change as being only "perceived". The report says:
 Concerns about the environmental impacts of coal combustion, including perceived impacts on global climate issues, are resulting in increased regulation of coal combustion in many jurisdictions and unfavorable lending policies by government-backed lending institutions and development banks toward the financing of new overseas coal-fueled power plants, and interest in further such regulation and policies, which could significantly affect demand for our products. 
That's a long-winded way of saying firms like Peabody Energy are seeing some writing on the wall for their industry while at the same time dismissing the entire field of climate-related science and its related disciplines as mere "perceptions" rather than reality.
Bjorn Lomborg
Danish political scientist Dr Bjorn Lomborg, of the US based Copenhagen Consensus Center think tank, was also on Peabody Energy's bill at the Brisbane event (curiously neither Brisbane Marketing, Peabody Energy or the think tank itself have been willing to disclose who asked Dr Lomborg to attend ).
Lomborg also advocates that the world's poor need "cheap" fossil fuels and thinks that the world has many more important problems to face than climate change.
It is no secret that the cost of renewable energy technologies has been dropping like several sacks of stones.
John Connor, CEO of The Climate Institute who spoke in opposition to Lomborg, remarked that he was the "token carbon offset" in a line up of speakers dominated by fossil fuel industry figures.
He told the audience that analysts were already predicting that large scale solar power would be "cheaper than coal in China and India within the next five to ten years" and that wind energy was already "at parity with new coal in India".
In a later press conference, I asked Lomborg if there was a risk that by pushing fossil fuel power stations that last up to 40 years onto developing countries you effectively lock-in the world's poor to expensive electricity (even before you factor in the costs of the impacts of climate change or health problems that come from burning the coal). Lomborg said:
 Right now the [International Energy Agency] estimate that even by 2040 sub-Saharan Africa will get somewhere between two and four per cent of its energy from renewables... sorry from new green energy. They will unfortunately get about 30 to 35 per cent from wood and dung which they definitely shouldn't be getting. It seems a good bet that if you want to help the world's poor you should get them on more power now and to a very large extent that's going to be fossil fuels. 
Lomborg is referring here to "primary energy" - that's everything from oil for cars and generators to wood burned on fires to coal burned in power plants.
The International Energy Agency has just released a report on what it thinks will be happen to the energy mix in sub-Saharan Africa under its "new policies scenario". Lomborg's figures seem to be out of date.
The IEA says that in the year 2040, some 47 per cent of all energy in sub-Saharan Africa will come from burning biomass (wood, dung, coal etc) which it hopes will be burned in more efficient cookstoves that will reduce the health costs and deaths from indoor air pollution. Lomborg had this figure at 35 per cent.
By 2040, coal's share of primary energy actually drops from 18 per cent to 15 per cent. Oil provides 17 per cent of energy, gas about 11 per cent and renewables about nine per cent (almost six per cent of this is from 'new green energy' such as solar and wind with the rest coming from hydro power).
But here's the real kicker.
The IEA says its scenario for Africa is "broadly consistent" with global warming of between 3C and 6C for the continent by the end of this century with a wide array of dangerous and some might argue catastrophic impacts (some of which the IPCC says the continent would be powerless to adapt to).
What seems clear then is that the International Energy Agency's "new policies scenario" is not particularly appetising for Africa.
Big emitters strike deal
But back to Brisbane.
Within minutes of the brief protest from youth climate campaigners, there was another injection of reality.
News began filtering through of the deal between the leaders of the world's top two emitters of greenhouse gases - the United States and China.
The US would cut its emissions by between 26 and 28 per cent by 2025 and China promises its emissions will peak and start to fall by the year 2030 - all in the name of limiting global warming to 2C (whether these cuts are enough is questionable, with early analysis from one respected team of climate analysts suggesting even deeper cuts will be needed).
Inside the cocoon of an event where the main sponsors don't accept that human caused climate change is even real, the news from Beijing seemed to further outline how rapidly the world could change - whether the coal industry likes it or not.
As for this weekend's G20 Leaders Summit, Australia Prime Minister Tony Abbott has been coming under pressure to find a place for climate change in the discussions.
If the issue is raised behind the closed-doors sessions, then it will be against Abbott's wishes. Gone also, apparently, are discussions about cutting fossil fuel subsidies that have featured at previous G20 meetings (a new report finds G20 countries are subsidizing exploration for coal, oil and gas to the tune of US$88 billion a year - between $2.9 billion and $3.5 billion from Australia).
The contents of the glossy G20 "delegate publication" reveals much about how the hosts want world leaders to see the future.
In 158 pages of adverts, sponsored features, ministerial forewords and articles from academics and think tank fellows, there's a barrage of impenetrable corporate management speak concerned with "growth", "free trade" and "economic governance".
The phrase "climate change" appears only four times. The first two pages are devoted to an advert for the mining industry.

Load-Date: November 13, 2014


End of Document




Liberal senator Ian Macdonald says children 'brainwashed' on climate change; Of course the climate changes, politician says, but idea that humanity is contributing to it is 'farcical and fanciful'
The Guardian
September 16, 2015 Wednesday 6:48 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 313 words
Byline: Melissa Davey
Body


The Liberal senator Ian Macdonald has said children are being "brainwashed" by education campaigns urging Australians to take action on climate change, describing the political debate about how to tackle it as "puerile".
"The children of Australia have been brainwashed into thinking if you turn off a light in Australia, somehow that is going to stop climate change," the Queensland senator told parliament on Wednesday. 
 Related: Malcolm Turnbull holds the line on climate policy and marriage equality plebiscite
"This is a puerile debate in its extreme. We have to bring some sense into the debate." 
Because Australia emits less than 1.2% of the world's carbon, considering an emissions trading scheme was "nonsensical," he said, adding that "few serious countries" outside of the EU were implementing such schemes. 
The Australian Bureau of Statistics places the country's emissions as closer to 1.5%. According to the Climate Institute, Australia is the largest per capita emitter in the industrialised world. 
Macdonald said he did not deny the climate was changing. "As I repeatedly say, Australia was once covered in ice," he said. "Of course the climate changes."
 Related: Turnbull pressed on climate change and cabinet reshuffle - question time live
But he challenged the theory that humans were contributing to this. "This new theory, I refer to it often as a fad or a farce or a hoax, that suddenly since man started the industrial age, a change of climate has happened is just farcical and fanciful."
He added that "stupid proposals" for a carbon tax would lead to jobs being sent offshore, accusing the Greens of "denigrating and belittling" people with alternative views.
Macdonald has frequently questioned taking action of climate change before other countries moved to do the same, and in 2013 said too many research grants were being allocated towards climate research.

Load-Date: September 16, 2015


End of Document




The megafires and pandemic expose the lies that frustrate action on climate change; If there was a moment of true emergency in the fight to preserve our climate, it is nowThis is part of a series of essays by Australian writers responding to the challenges of 2020
The Guardian (London)
September 16, 2020 Wednesday 6:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 2123 words
Byline: Tim Flannery
Highlight: If there was a moment of true emergency in the fight to preserve our climate, it is nowThis is part of a series of essays by Australian writers responding to the challenges of 2020


Body


I was in Melbourne in late January, watching as more and more people donned face masks to protect themselves against the bushfire smoke that had thickened the air for weeks and that was causing hundreds of deaths. Turning on the news, I was surprised to see footage of crowds in China similarly masked, but for a very different reason. Hundreds were then dying in Wuhan, Hubei province, from a novel virus.
When I asked Australia's chief medical officer about the virus that same week, I could see the concern in his eyes. But my attention was largely on the fires. They were unlike anything experienced on the continent previously, and climate scientists were beginning to piece together the link with climate change. What few knew back then was that three catastrophes would strike Australia in quick succession: the unprecedented, climate-fuelled megafires that were extinguished in February by damaging, climate-influenced floods. Then, in March, the Covid-19 pandemic that began to spread across Australia.
These three catastrophes are proof that things that travel invisibly through the great aerial ocean that is our atmosphere are a particular danger to our complex, global civilisation. The carbon dioxide molecule that accumulates imperceptibly as we burn fossil fuels causes an increase in average global temperature, which triggered the profoundly disruptive droughts, floods and fires that plagued Australia over the past year. But the coronavirus also travels unseen through the great aerial ocean, insinuating itself in lung after lung, killing person after person, until it threatens our health system, economy and society.
There are many differences between climate change and the Covid-19 pandemic but, from the perspective of prevention, there are also many similarities. Perhaps the most important is that both have "incubation periods" during which the problem grows, undetected, except by the experts. Throughout this period, things can seem relatively normal but, unless a sense of urgency leads to decisive action at this time, catastrophe becomes inevitable.
The actions required to contain both a pandemic and climate change are also broadly similar, and involve three steps. The first and most urgent is to stop the threat from growing. For Covid-19, that involved introducing social distancing, closing schools and halting entire industries. For climate change it means dramatically cutting the use of fossil fuels. The second step involves ensuring that we can save as many of the stricken as possible. For Covid-19, that meant preparing emergency wards and other treatment facilities. For climate change it means instituting measures to deal with a sweeping variety of issues, including future megafires, the threat to the Great Barrier Reef, and vulnerable coasts. The third step involves finding a permanent fix. For Covid-19, that means the development of a vaccine, while for climate change it involves removing the excess CO2 from the atmosphere.
The climate emergency is now entering a crucial phase
Many Australians have been astonished at the contrast between the federal government's responses to the pandemic and to the climate threat. It was missing in action for much of the climate-related megafire and flood crisis but in the face of a pandemic it acted swiftly. A real sense of urgency, prompted by scientific advice, was evident when Australia cancelled flights from China in February (well before most other nations had acted), and when it labelled the Covid-19 threat a global pandemic 12 days before the World Health Organization announced that it was upgrading the threat to that status. But bigger things were to come. In the middle of March, by which time the number of infections in Australia was doubling every four days, the Morrison government locked the nation down, dealing a devastating blow to the economy but saving thousands of lives.
Overall, Australia has mounted one of the most effective responses to the virus of any country. Yet on climate change it remains unalarmed and unmotivated. This may prove catastrophic, for the climate emergency is now entering a crucial phase. In Covid-19 terms, we are in mid-March - the last possible moment for emergency action. That's because the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is now so great that to delay even for a few more years risks triggering Earth's tipping points. And if that happens, there will be no way back.
Researchers have identified 15 tipping points for Earth's climate system. They involve things like the melting of glaciers and ice caps, the destruction of the Amazon's forests and the altering of ocean currents. Trigger any of them and a cascade of consequences is unleashed that will lead to out-of-control planetary heating. Trigger the tipping points, and almost everything about Earth will change, including biodiversity, the coasts, our food and water security, and our health.
The urgency of our situation has been underlined by Australia's most eminent climate scientist, Prof Will Steffen. In an interview with Voice of Action on 5 June, Steffen said "we are already deep into the trajectory towards collapse" of our civilisation, because nine of the 15 known global tipping points have already been activated. This is the equivalent of the nation's chief medical officer telling the prime minister in March that he must act today if he wishes to contain the pandemic.
To date, government action on climate change has been so tardy that very soon, enough CO2 will be in the atmosphere to make it impossible to achieve the lower Paris agreement target of keeping warming below 1.5C. And, within a few years of that, there will be enough to make the higher target of 2C unobtainable. Time is now so short that we cannot wait for the next Australian election for action. It is the Morrison government that must act decisively if Australia is to do its part in averting this looming disaster. Despite the obvious impediments and appalling track record of some Coalition governments, looking back on the events of early 2020 I have hope that the Morrison government can lead Australia out of danger.
Sometimes it takes a terrible disaster to alert people and Australia's megafires may well be the moment when we as a nation awoke to how exquisitely vulnerable our country is to the effects of climate change. Historically, in a bad bushfire year about 2% of Australia's forests will be burned. But in the summer of 2019-20, more than 21% of the country's forests was aflame. That's a tenfold increase and it's the kind of step change that we're increasingly seeing as our climate system begins to destabilise.
The link between the megafires and climate change is clear. South-eastern Australia has been getting hotter and drier for decades, and 2019 was Australia's hottest and driest year on record, with 2018 being equally dry over south-eastern Australia and almost as hot. Fires are profoundly influenced by temperature and dryness (which is why they occur in summer rather than winter), and the long, hot, dry spell of 2018-19 set Australia's forests up for burning. Fire chiefs had been warning of the danger for months but the prime minister had refused a meeting to discuss the growing emergency. He even went on holiday as the fires began to peak. By the time widespread flooding extinguished the fires in February 2020, 34 people had died in the flames, nearly 3,000 houses had been destroyed and entire regional economies were in tatters.
Beginning with the UK in May 2019, one nation after another has proclaimed a climate emergency. And they are acting strongly to deal with that emergency. By mid-June, the UK (the country where industrial coal-burning started) had gone two months without burning coal. But Australia has neither declared a climate emergency nor acted decisively. Despite our abundant sunlight and wind resources we are still 60% dependent on coal for our electricity needs.
There could not be a clearer case of the dangers of inaction in the face of the climate emergency than Australia's megafires. Exactly why the federal government is not treating the climate emergency as it did the health emergency is probably known only to Morrison's cabinet. But a few factors are evident to all.
That Australia is the world's largest exporter of gas and coal, two of the three fossil fuels (along with oil) that are causing climate change, is clearly fundamental. Too many people, including some politicians, are doing far too well from the trade in fossil fuels to want to stymie it, regardless of the impact on the rest of us. With coal in global decline and few oil resources, gas is the healthiest sector of Australia's fossil fuel industry, and it is the gas sector that the Morrison government is focusing on to lead the post-Covid recovery.
But if economic opportunity were the only driver of climate denialism, it could be countered by creating opportunity elsewhere, and to some extent this is happening. With enormous potential to be found in green hydrogen and the renewables sector, some bright young people are leaving the fossil fuel industry and staking their futures on the new, clean economy. What is holding back progress most strongly is the $80bn that corporations have invested in domestic gas infrastructure. Acting on the climate emergency would mean that these corporations will face huge losses. In ignoring the climate scientists and investing so heavily in gas they have made a bad economic bet but are unwilling to face the consequences.
Interwoven with self-interest, the Morrison government suffers from a thick strand of climate denialism that feeds on on tribalism and wilful ignorance. The former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull believes that the Coalition continues to struggle with climate denialism. But there has been a shift, at least in terms of rhetoric, since the megafires. It's been a while since we heard climate lunacy from the mouth of Craig Kelly, and two of the most adamant denialists in the National party, Barnaby Joyce and Matt Canavan, are now languishing on the backbench.
I think that as the full consequences of the megafires begin to be understood, climate denialism will become more and more difficult to sustain. The economic impact of the megafires is not insignificant: estimates put the full cost between $100bn and $200bn. Because the damage is concentrated in certain regions, those communities will suffer for years as they strive to rebuild.
Finally, there are likely to be more megafires in the future. If we had not already added so much CO2 to the atmosphere, we could expect conditions as hot and dry as those of 2019 to occur around once every 400 years. But, due to the levels greenhouse gases had reached by 2013, that probability has increased to once every eight years.
Will the Morrison government act in time? There is one important difference between the pandemic and the climate emergency that may hinder prompt climate action. Pandemics grow quickly: one week there might only be a scatter of cases, but within a fortnight, without strong action, there could be thousands. By comparison, the climate emergency is slow-moving. The fate of Turnbull warns that those struggling against self-interest and climate denialism have a difficult job ahead of them.
One cause for optimism, however, lies in the fact that the megafires and the pandemic have exposed some of the lies told to frustrate action on climate change. That it would be "economy wrecking" to take action in the face of the climate emergency is one. Australian electors now understand that their government can do extraordinary things to protect them.
One thing we could all do right now to help is to challenge the denialists. Before the Covid restrictions, hundreds of people attended a meeting in Sydney's Sutherland shire aimed at ousting their local member, Craig Kelly, in order to replace him with a representative who understands the need for climate action. And at the 2019 election, denialist-in-chief Tony Abbott was defeated by an independent, Zali Steggall. Were the denialists visibly challenged everywhere, their grasp of power within the Coalition would slip even before the next election.
Tragically, the news from the climate scientists is getting worse and worse. Increasingly, many experts are viewing 2021, and specifically the UN climate change conference to be held in Glasgow late that year, as humanity's last chance to avoid an environmental apocalypse. If there was a moment of true emergency in the fight to preserve our climate, it is now.
                      This essay will be part of the anthology Fire, Flood and Plague, edited by Sophie Cunningham and published by Penguin Random House in December                   

Load-Date: September 16, 2020


End of Document




What would Jesus do? Talking with evangelicals about climate change; In our new column about the American south and climate change, we go towards Christians who have been resistant to ideas of environmental stewardship - perhaps it's a message they need to hear in their own terms
The Guardian(London)
December 19, 2018 Wednesday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:2
Length: 3546 words
Byline: Megan Mayhew Bergman
Body


I was, frankly, nervous about speaking to people of faith in the south about climate change. I wrestled with my own preconceived notions and past experiences, and was surprised when conversations took inspiring, if not transcendent, turns.
Secular as I am now, I still think fondly of my childhood minister, Dr Lehman, who loved college basketball and Honda Accords (he drove 13 of them during his lifetime). At the conclusion of each Lakeside Baptist service, he'd call the eastern North Carolina congregation to action.
"Go forth," he said as the organ began to play, "and be involved in the world."
My family later moved to Spartanburg, South Carolina, and my high school experience felt ripped from the pages of the Footloose script. Local parents disowned gay sons; classmates openly questioned the science of evolution in biology class; Young Life leaders plastered an Abstinence Pledge on the wall of our public school cafeteria.
My frustration from those years has at times stopped me from reaching out to those in the faith-based community, especially regarding political issues like climate change. I'm aware of my own bias, the way it was formed by negative experiences, and how it limits my understanding of believers and their choices. This realization helps me understand why believers might in turn have problems connecting with someone like me.
But if we're going to address climate change in time to prevent catastrophic results, we're going to do it by taking cooperative action with those with whom we disagree. I find myself wondering if similar discussions are happening in faith-based communities, and why there hasn't been a more palpable response to climate change among people of faith in the south.
While climate change scenarios have all the hallmarks of biblical narrative - violent storms, epic floods, plagues, resource scarcity, the displacement of people - it's considered liberal political terrain. Scott Coleman, a practicing Baptist and the amiable environmental manager of Little St Simons Island, a mostly undeveloped strip of shoreline off the coast of Georgia, tells me that "environmental stewardship is often associated with liberal politics, thus looked upon negatively".
The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.
  Genesis 2:15    
The political power of the pulpit is undeniable, even in the post-Billy Graham south, where in many states nearly half of all citizens attend church services.
I can't help but imagine the sheer impact a faith-based movement could have on expediting climate action. Scott Coleman agrees. "I think that if our faith leaders in the south were more outspoken about the importance of creation care, it would go a long way in helping to depoliticize environmental issues in our region," he says. "And if we could depoliticize environmental stewardship in the south, imagine the progress we could make with elevating environmental stewardship in southern culture."
I spoke with people of faith in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia, and it became clear that the primary barrier to climate action is the fact that it's been yoked with the liberal agenda. Climate activist and author Anna Jane Joyner, whose father is the pastor of a megachurch in North Carolina, writes that she grew up lumping "environmentalists in with hippies and liberals and all the other people who were probably going to hell".
Dr Lucas Johnston, a professor of religion and environment at Wake Forest University, explains that "there is a longstanding antipathy toward environmental sentiments in Christian, and especially evangelical circles, because they have, for centuries, been imagined as pernicious and dangerous, and possibly bordering on paganism."
I asked former six-term South Carolina Republican congressman Bob Inglis why discussing climate change is so difficult in the south. A proponent of growing the eco-right and setting the free market upon the challenges of climate change, he called the environmental movement a bird with a left wing so large it can't fly straight. Climate change is "rarely talked about in the language of conservatism", he explained. "If you want someone to have a conversion moment, it helps for them to hear it in their own language, from someone they trust."
Inglis has been trying to start the conversation in conservative southern circles since having his own conversion moment on a trip to Antarctica in 2006. A scientist drilled into the ice, and Inglis saw, firsthand, the Industrial Revolution's impact on the ice record, which revealed a long period of stability with a sudden uptick in carbon dioxide levels. He accepted then that burning fossil fuels changed the chemistry of the atmosphere. He was later booed at public events for stating his belief in climate change.
We reject the notion that God gave us the Earth to do with whatever we please.
  A Lutheran worshipper from Atlantic Beach    
While in office, Inglis introduced a Raise Wages, Cut Carbon bill. Though grounded in science and conservative economic principles, his efforts were seen as subversive by Tea Party opponents, who essentially implied his bill would destroy civilization. "I had crossed the line of orthodoxy," he said.
There's a perceived social and political cost to speaking up about climate issues among people of faith in the south. Roughly half of the southerners I spoke with felt that people in the south avoided talking about climate change altogether because it was awkward and politically divisive. Mary Beene, a pastor in Savannah, notes that "in our congregation, it was a more controversial topic than race or sexuality". She observed that some women in the south who believed in climate change worried "it simply would not be polite to challenge what the men ... were saying in public."
Indeed, white male evangelicals are still dominating the conversation and decision-making power structures.
Watch, for example, this clip from a 2014 GOP Senate primary debate in North Carolina, where four contenders, including Senator Thom Tillis, deny that manmade activity influences climate change in under one minute. Tillis, whom the Center for Responsive Politics reports as having received over $260,000 from oil, gas and coal interests, won the Senate seat, with 63% of his            voters identifying as evangelicals or born-again Christians. Ninety-five percent of them were white.
According to Pew, 77% of Hispanic Catholics are likely to say human activity has contributed to the Earth's warming. Religiously unaffiliated (64%) and black Protestants (56%) are also likely to tie climate change to human activity. Pew points out that "fewer white mainline Protestants (41%) view climate change as primarily due to human activity ... white evangelical Protestants are least likely to hold this view."
                     When Rabbi Rachael Bregman moved to Brunswick, Georgia, she was told: hurricanes don't happen here. Then she evacuated for both Irma and Matthew. "Both of the evacuations were on top of the holy days where we say the words of the Unataneh Tokef," she tells me. "It's a prayer which asks, 'who by fire, who by water ... who by drowning' regarding the end of one's life. Those questions felt very real and not metaphorical."
Her synagogue is 12 feet above sea level and a half-mile from the ocean's edge. During recent hurricanes, they "evacuated our five Torah scrolls, locked the doors and hoped for the best for our 130-year-old building. What has surprised me," she says, "is how little has changed and how little environmental activism sprang up as a result."
Bregman, like many I talked to, has witnessed climate change firsthand and is eager to see more responsiveness in the faith-based community. She has made personal changes, like switching to an electric car; greening up at the synagogue; and offering a sermon on climate change.
Tony Lankford, the senior pastor at the First Baptist church in Saint Simons, has also improved the church's energy and water use, and organized a Coastal Green Team Summit for faith leaders to discuss climate change.
There is a lack of emphasis on climate change in the South due to a lack of knowledge. We often experience it but, we don't know how to articulate what we experience.
  A United Church of Christ follower, Birmingham, AL    
Lankford feels that "regardless of political or theological leanings, there is agreement upon the basic tenet that God formed all of this beauty around us, and scripture [Genesis 1-2] gives us a responsibility to be stewards of that creation. For me, thus, mismanagement and abuse of creation is not only immoral or unethical, but is sinful."
The majority of southern believers I spoke to reported never hearing climate change mentioned in a sermon, but, like Lankford, could ground feelings about protecting the Earth in scripture, and felt that there was a strong moral imperative to protect the planet and its inhabitants.
Several mentioned Dr Katharine Wilkinson's book Between God and Green: How Evangelicals Are Cultivating a Middle Ground on Climate Change as helping them articulate a scriptural basis for taking climate action in the future.
When Bob Inglis - someone with whom I probably disagree on several core issues - spoke with reverence about seeing an Australian scientist evangelize about the natural world at the Great Barrier Reef, I could recognize his passion for the natural world as my own. Sometimes, common ground gets lost in semantics.
Inglis gave me the rational and the emotional case for his conversion from skeptic to climate change believer. The emotional  case is what has stayed with me most since our talk, and is one I hope other skeptics manage to hear from their children, like Inglis did.
His son once told him, lovingly: "Be relevant to my future. Show some courage."
                       A note from the author:  I started this column with the intention of joining a conversation I knew was already happening in the south, and your emails helped make that a reality last week.                   
                     I heard from retired marine biologists in Arkansas, philanthropists in Georgia, theologists in Virginia, poets and boat captains in Louisiana, lawyers in Florida, clean air activists in Mississippi. I also heard from climate change deniers, brand marketers, and ... an old boyfriend.                   
                     I want to witness and listen to the south as it really is - not just how I want it to be. I'm doing my best to stay curious and open-minded and look forward to your continued responses. I hit the road in January, with an eye toward Mississippi, Louisiana, and Alabama. What should I see there?                   
                       1657 false immersive 2018-12-19T11:00:28Z false false 2018-12-19T15:15:45Z US theguardian.com https://gu.com/p/a89ph false true            https://media.guim.co.uk/38c454b5d02519474171da258bd449179b60fac8/0_441_3000_1800/500.jpg false en I was, frankly, nervous about speaking to people of faith in the south about climate change. I wrestled with my own preconceived notions and past experiences, and was surprised when conversations took inspiring, if not transcendent, turns. Secular as I am now, I still think fondly of my childhood minister, Dr Lehman, who loved college basketball and Honda Accords (he drove 13 of them during his lifetime). At the conclusion of each Lakeside Baptist service, he'd call the eastern North Carolina congregation to action. "Go forth," he said as the organ began to play, "and be involved in the world." My family later moved to Spartanburg, South Carolina, and my high school experience felt ripped from the pages of the Footloose script. Local parents disowned gay sons; classmates openly questioned the science of evolution in biology class; Young Life leaders plastered an Abstinence Pledge on the wall of our public school cafeteria. My frustration from those years has at times stopped me from reaching out to those in the faith-based community, especially regarding political issues like climate change. I'm aware of my own bias, the way it was formed by negative experiences, and how it limits my understanding of believers and their choices. This realization helps me understand why believers might in turn have problems connecting with someone like me. But if we're going to address climate change in time to prevent catastrophic results, we're going to do it by taking cooperative action with those with whom we disagree. I find myself wondering if similar discussions are happening in faith-based communities, and why there hasn't been a more palpable response to climate change among people of faith in the south. While climate change scenarios have all the hallmarks of biblical narrative - violent storms, epic floods, plagues, resource scarcity, the displacement of people - it's considered liberal political terrain. Scott Coleman, a practicing Baptist and the amiable environmental manager of Little St Simons Island, a mostly undeveloped strip of shoreline off the coast of Georgia, tells me that "environmental stewardship is often associated with liberal politics, thus looked upon negatively". The political power of the pulpit is undeniable, even in the post-Billy Graham south, where in many states nearly half of all citizens attend church services. I can't help but imagine the sheer impact a faith-based movement could have on expediting climate action. Scott Coleman agrees. "I think that if our faith leaders in the south were more outspoken about the importance of creation care, it would go a long way in helping to depoliticize environmental issues in our region," he says. "And if we could depoliticize environmental stewardship in the south, imagine the progress we could make with elevating environmental stewardship in southern culture." I spoke with people of faith in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia, and it became clear that the primary barrier to climate action is the fact that it's been yoked with the liberal agenda. Climate activist and author Anna Jane Joyner, whose father is the pastor of a megachurch in North Carolina, writes that she grew up lumping "environmentalists in with hippies and liberals and all the other people who were probably going to hell". Dr Lucas Johnston, a professor of religion and environment at Wake Forest University, explains that "there is a longstanding antipathy toward environmental sentiments in Christian, and especially evangelical circles, because they have, for centuries, been imagined as pernicious and dangerous, and possibly bordering on paganism." I asked former six-term South Carolina Republican congressman Bob Inglis why discussing climate change is so difficult in the south. A proponent of growing the eco-right and setting the free market upon the challenges of climate change, he called the environmental movement a bird with a left wing so large it can't fly straight. Climate change is "rarely talked about in the language of conservatism", he explained. "If you want someone to have a conversion moment, it helps for them to hear it in their own language, from someone they trust." Inglis has been trying to start the conversation in conservative southern circles since having his own conversion moment on a trip to Antarctica in 2006. A scientist drilled into the ice, and Inglis saw, firsthand, the Industrial Revolution's impact on the ice record, which revealed a long period of stability with a sudden uptick in carbon dioxide levels. He accepted then that burning fossil fuels changed the chemistry of the atmosphere. He was later booed at public events for stating his belief in climate change. While in office, Inglis introduced a Raise Wages, Cut Carbon bill. Though grounded in science and conservative economic principles, his efforts were seen as subversive by Tea Party opponents, who essentially implied his bill would destroy civilization. "I had crossed the line of orthodoxy," he said. There's a perceived social and political cost to speaking up about climate issues among people of faith in the south. Roughly half of the southerners I spoke with felt that people in the south avoided talking about climate change altogether because it was awkward and politically divisive. Mary Beene, a pastor in Savannah, notes that "in our congregation, it was a more controversial topic than race or sexuality". She observed that some women in the south who believed in climate change worried "it simply would not be polite to challenge what the men ... were saying in public." Indeed, white male evangelicals are still dominating the conversation and decision-making power structures. Watch, for example, this clip from a 2014 GOP Senate primary debate in North Carolina, where four contenders, including Senator Thom Tillis, deny that manmade activity influences climate change in under one minute. Tillis, whom the Center for Responsive Politics reports as having received over $260,000 from oil, gas and coal interests, won the Senate seat, with 63% of his voters identifying as evangelicals or born-again Christians. Ninety-five percent of them were white. According to Pew, 77% of Hispanic Catholics are likely to say human activity has contributed to the Earth's warming. Religiously unaffiliated (64%) and black Protestants (56%) are also likely to tie climate change to human activity. Pew points out that "fewer white mainline Protestants (41%) view climate change as primarily due to human activity ... white evangelical Protestants are least likely to hold this view." When Rabbi Rachael Bregman moved to Brunswick, Georgia, she was told: hurricanes don't happen here. Then she evacuated for both Irma and Matthew. "Both of the evacuations were on top of the holy days where we say the words of the Unataneh Tokef," she tells me. "It's a prayer which asks, 'who by fire, who by water ... who by drowning' regarding the end of one's life. Those questions felt very real and not metaphorical." Her synagogue is 12 feet above sea level and a half-mile from the ocean's edge. During recent hurricanes, they "evacuated our five Torah scrolls, locked the doors and hoped for the best for our 130-year-old building. What has surprised me," she says, "is how little has changed and how little environmental activism sprang up as a result." Bregman, like many I talked to, has witnessed climate change firsthand and is eager to see more responsiveness in the faith-based community. She has made personal changes, like switching to an electric car; greening up at the synagogue; and offering a sermon on climate change. Tony Lankford, the senior pastor at the First Baptist church in Saint Simons, has also improved the church's energy and water use, and organized a Coastal Green Team Summit for faith leaders to discuss climate change. Lankford feels that "regardless of political or theological leanings, there is agreement upon the basic tenet that God formed all of this beauty around us, and scripture [Genesis 1-2] gives us a responsibility to be stewards of that creation. For me, thus, mismanagement and abuse of creation is not only immoral or unethical, but is sinful." The majority of southern believers I spoke to reported never hearing climate change mentioned in a sermon, but, like Lankford, could ground feelings about protecting the Earth in scripture, and felt that there was a strong moral imperative to protect the planet and its inhabitants. Several mentioned Dr Katharine Wilkinson's book Between God and Green: How Evangelicals Are Cultivating a Middle Ground on Climate Change as helping them articulate a scriptural basis for taking climate action in the future. When Bob Inglis - someone with whom I probably disagree on several core issues - spoke with reverence about seeing an Australian scientist evangelize about the natural world at the Great Barrier Reef, I could recognize his passion for the natural world as my own. Sometimes, common ground gets lost in semantics. Inglis gave me the rational and the emotional case for his conversion from skeptic to climate change believer. The emotional case is what has stayed with me most since our talk, and is one I hope other skeptics manage to hear from their children, like Inglis did. His son once told him, lovingly: "Be relevant to my future. Show some courage." A note from the author: I started this column with the intention of joining a conversation I knew was already happening in the south, and your emails helped make that a reality last week. I heard from retired marine biologists in Arkansas, philanthropists in Georgia, theologists in Virginia, poets and boat captains in Louisiana, lawyers in Florida, clean air activists in Mississippi. I also heard from climate change deniers, brand marketers, and ... an old boyfriend. I want to witness and listen to the south as it really is - not just how I want it to be. I'm doing my best to stay curious and open-minded and look forward to your continued responses. I hit the road in January, with an eye toward Mississippi, Louisiana, and Alabama. What should I see there? 10163 false false      What would Jesus do?         The shoreline in Buxton on North Carolina's Hatteras Island.     

Load-Date: December 19, 2018


End of Document




Study: inspiring action on climate change is more complex than you might think; People have to grasp how climate change impacts them, and we need to value environmentally sound behavior
The Guardian(London)
May 19, 2017 Friday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 1001 words
Byline: John Abraham
Body


We know humans are causing climate change. That is a fact that has been known for well over 100 years. We also know that there will be significant social and economic costs from the effects. In fact, the effects are already appearing in the form of more extreme weather, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, and so on.
So why haven't humans done much about the problem? Answering that question may be more challenging than the basic science of a changing climate. Fortunately, a new review just out in Science helps us with this question. Lead author, Dr. Elise Amel, a colleague of mine, completed the review with colleagues Drs. Christie Manning, Britain Scott, and Susan Koger. Rather than focusing solely on the problems with communicating the science of climate change, this work takes a wider view on the hurdles that get in the way of meaningful action. 
The review points out that since the 1970s, extensive efforts to educate people have not lead to significant shifts in behavior. They also acknowledge that using fear or guilt has not been effective in getting people to act. So, what can help? 
Well, first we must understand that it is not just internal forces (emotions, beliefs, attitudes, etc.) that affect human behavior, but external influences as well. External factors, like social networks, societal roles, cultural worldviews, habits, infrastructure, investments, etc, are often severely underestimated in the extent to which they steer behavior. One fault of prior messaging is an almost exclusive focus of the first (internal) set of factors and a near-complete neglect of the latter (externals). The authors write:
                       Change is hard. Human beings are reticent to change their behavior even under the most compelling of circumstances, and environmental dangers do not tend to arouse the kind of urgency that motivates individuals to act. Mass transformation of unsustainable systems will be even more difficult than shifting individual behaviors, for unlike ants and bees, humans are not well equipped to coordinate behavior for common benefit.                     
Here is really the center of the problem, the social dilemma wherein it is in the collective's interest to act in one way but individuals may benefit personally if they act in another way. 
This struggle for humans to manage our impact on climate is made more complex by the unique issue of climate change; it is a long-term problem that has no apparent immediate and personal threats. Simply put, we need to take actions now to avoid problems later on even though we personally may not experience these consequences. 
To counter this disconnect, climate change discussions need to be framed as matters related to current impacts at the local level. It is great that we want to save polar bears, but what really will motivate people are the risks to them right now. Fortunately or unfortunately, depending on your viewpoint, it is becoming easier and easier to make these connections. Examples abound for instance terrible flooding in the central USA, the record drought in California, recent heat waves in central Asia, or in Australia, as just some examples. 
The authors identify a variety of strategies for moving forward with human limitations in mind. Since they acknowledge humans tend not to protect those things they either don't know or don't value, ingraining a sense of value in the natural world may be critical. In fact, there is a strong relationship between an individual's connection to nature and their ecological behavior. In today's world of growing industrialization and severing of the nature/human connection, the challenge may be to find and create new connection opportunities.
More immediately, the authors encourage efforts to change the social norms surrounding environmentally sound behavior - making it cool again. 
In fact, individuals play a critical role in inspiring collective actions within various spheres of influence (see the above figure), which is the kind of behavior needed to change the enormous systems - food, transportation, retail, etc. - disproportionately impacting the planet. The review highlights how transformational individuals - those who decide to step outside of accepted social norms - can bring about large-scale change in their social networks and within the organizations of which they are a part. While it feels incredibly awkward to do something different than the norm, we are all capable of it. And, it's easier if we don't have to do it alone, so supporting others who take a stand is a crucial role we can all play.
I think the summary of the paper does a great job encapsulating the work's important lessons. The authors write:
                       Psychological research suggests that humans can move toward a sustainable society by creating conditions that motivate environmentally responsible collective action - conditions that help people surmount cognitive limits, create new situational drivers, foster need fulfillment, and support communities of social change. Individuals whose actions are informed by a deeper understanding of how the planet really works can galvanize collectives to change the larger systems that drive so much of human behavior. To radically alter the way humans think and live; educate the next generation; and design physical, governmental, and cultural systems, humans must experience and better understand their profound interdependence with the planet.                                            
And this is where the important research is going. Physical scientists have shown without any remaining doubt that humans are causing climate change. There are no reputable scientists that would disagree. So now that the physical science battle has been won, it is time to move on to hearts and minds. We need both individual and collective change. If we are smart, we can not only save the planet but we can develop a rich relationship with the world and our neighbors and save the future of our species.

Load-Date: May 19, 2017


End of Document




Live Q&A: how do we improve nutrition while tackling climate change?; With climate change, nutrition and food security intimately linked, are world leaders ready to make real progress at COP 21? Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November to discuss
The Guardian
November 24, 2015 Tuesday 5:26 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONALS NETWORK
Length: 498 words
Byline: Holly Young
Body


Climate change presents a serious threat to nutrition and food security. 
Earlier this year, the World Food Programme made bleak predictions underlining the connection between the two issues. With climate change increasing the risk and intensity of climate disasters such as floods and drought, unless huge efforts are made to increase climate resilience, the risk of hunger and malnutrition could increase by 20% by 2050. 
It is also a two-way relationship. An estimated 25% of the world's greenhouse gases are produced from global food systems, of which half comes from food production and the other from transportation, packaging, processing and land use for agriculture. 
With world leaders preparing to descend on Paris for climate talks at COP 21, there is clearly an opportunity to make progress on both issues. What are the practical solutions to tackling climate change, while improving nutrition and food security? And what are the challenges involved? 
Join an expert panel on Thursday 26 November, 1-3pm GMT, to discuss these questions and more.
                     The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or @GuardianGDP on Twitter to recommend someone for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag #globaldevlive.                   
Panel
                     Peggy Pascal, food security advocacy officer, Action Against Hunger, Paris, France.                      @PascalPeggy                   
Peggy heads up food security advocacy for Action Against Hunger in Paris and has been leading the ACF International Network's climate and nutrition work in the context of COP21. 
                     Dominic Schofield, director, GAIN Canada, Ottawa, Canada.  @dschofieldGAIN                   
Dominic is director of GAIN Canada and senior technical advisor policy and programmes. He has over twenty years in the field of international development with assignments in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, South and Southeast Asia.
                     Anna Lartey, director of nutrition, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy.                    
Prior to joining the FAO Anna was a professor of nutrition at the University of Ghana. She worked as a researcher in Sub-Saharan Africa for 27 years and her research focused on maternal child nutrition.
                     Masroora Haque, communications manager, International Centre for Climate Change and Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh, @masroora                                        
Masroora works on climate change, adaptation and policy for the International Centre for Climate Change and Development.
                     Nick Hughes, food sustainability advisor, WWF-UK, London, UK.                    
Nick works on sustainable diets for WWF-UK and leads their partnership with foodservice provider Sodexo.
                     More panellists to be announced.                    

Load-Date: November 24, 2015


End of Document




Portuguese children to crowdfund European climate change case; Group from region hit by deadly forest fires to sue 47 countries alleging failure to tackle climate change threatens their right to life
The Guardian(London)
September 25, 2017 Monday 12:01 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 579 words
Byline: Sandra Laville
Body


Portuguese schoolchildren from the area struck by the country's worst forest fires are seeking crowdfunding to sue 47 European countries, alleging that the states' failure to tackle climate change threatens their right to life.
The children, from the Leiria region of central Portugal, where fires this summer killed more than 60 people and left hundreds injured, are being represented by British barristers who are experts in environmental and climate change law. 
Supported by the NGO Global Legal Action Network (Glan), they are seeking an initial £35,000 to mount the case in the European court of human rights.
                     The crowdfunding bid was published on Monday on the platform CrowdJustice, which has raised millions to help bring citizen-led cases to court.
Lawyers will seek a ruling from the court that the countries being sued must significantly strengthen their emissions reduction policies and commit to keeping the majority of their existing fossil fuel reserves in the ground.
The lead counsel, Marc Willers QC of Garden Court Chambers, said: "This case intends to build on the successes which have been achieved through climate change litigation across the world so far.
"It will be unique because it will be the first case in which multiple governments are brought before a court at the one time in relation to their failure to properly tackle climate change. 
"Climate change poses a major and increasingly worsening threat to a number of human rights and governments in Europe are simply not doing enough to address it."
The children, aged between five and 14, all come from Leiria, which suffered Portugal's deadliest fires this summer. 
Some experts have blamed the increase in forest fires in Europe on climate change. 
A 14-year-old who is part of the group taking action said: "Climate change causes many problems, but if I had to name the ones that worry me the most, it would be the sea level rise, which leads to the destruction of shores and infrastructure such as dams, roads and houses, and also the increase in the number of forest fires that we've been observing lately - especially this summer, as the fires caused many deaths and left our country in mourning." 
The legal action will target the 47 nations who are the major emitters in Europe - including the UK, Ireland, Germany and France. These 47 were collectively responsible for roughly 15% of global emissions and held a significant proportion of the world's known fossil fuel reserves, said the Glan director, Dr Gearóid Ó Cuinn.
European court of human rights decisions are binding on these states.
The case is also being taken to raise public awareness about what Glan says are the shortcomings in government policies on climate change. 
Ó Cuinn said: "We will work with civil society organisations throughout Europe to use our case to highlight the fact that unless governments urgently take much stronger action to prevent the release of greenhouse gas emissions, it is only a matter of decades before we'll be witnessing the catastrophic consequences of insufficient action."
                     Two years ago a group of Dutch citizens - organised by the NGO Urgenda - successfully sued their government for negligence for knowingly contributing to a breach of the 2C maximum target for global warming. 
Three judges ordered the Dutch government to cut its emissions by 25% by 2020, saying their lower targets were unlawful given the scale of the threat posed by climate change.

Load-Date: September 25, 2017


End of Document




Climate change: Climate change fatigue: Do speakers at today's Guardian conference think it is a real problem?: Keith Allot, head of climate change at WWF
The Guardian - Final Edition
July 16, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN NEWSPRINT SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 3
Length: 192 words
Byline: Keith Allot
Body


No. The perception of climate change fatigue is much greater than the reality. It's mainly a great story for the media: that amid rising energy bills climate change is yesterday's story. It's not yesterday's story. There are huge opportunities for business to prosper in a low-carbon economy - though there will be losers as well as winners. There is fatigue with the level of noise and greenwash from companies about climate change, and also with incoherent government policies, such as support for endless airport expansion and new, unabated coal-fired power stations. Until now there hasn't been a clear governmental policy framework to encourage the private sector to shift gears. But the government has announced it will go for the EU's renewable energy targets, which is a bold initiative. If the UK Climate Change Bill is suitably strong, if an international climate change agreement is reached (at the climate talks) in Copenhagen next year, and if the EU's climate change plan goes through, without any big loopholes or weasel words, business will have a clear road map, and companies that have the solutions (in a low-carbon economy) will prosper.

Load-Date: July 17, 2008


End of Document




From heatwaves to hurricanes, floods to famine: seven climate change hotspots; Global warming will not affect everyone equally. Here we look at seven key regions to see how each is tackling the consequences of climate change
The Guardian(London)
June 23, 2017 Friday 12:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 4476 words
Byline: John Vidal
Body


It could have been the edge of the Sahara or even Death Valley, but it was the remains of a large orchard in the hills above the city of Murcia in southern Spain last year. The soil had broken down into fine white, lifeless sand, and a landscape of rock and dying orange and lemon trees stretched into the distance.
A long drought, the second in a few years, had devastated the harvest after city authorities had restricted water supplies and farmers were protesting in the street. It was a foretaste of what may happen if temperatures in the Mediterranean basin continue to rise and desertification grows.
All round the world, farmers, city authorities and scientists have observed changing patterns of rainfall, temperature rises and floods. Fifteen of the 16 hottest years have been recorded since 2000. Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions steadily climb. Oceans are warming and glaciers, ice caps and sea ice are melting faster than expected. Meanwhile, heat and rainfall records tumble. 
The evidence for the onset of climate change is compelling. But who and where is it hitting the hardest? How fast will it come to Africa, or the US? What will be its impact on tropical cities, forests or farming? On the poor, or the old? When it comes to details, much is uncertain. 
 Related:  Barack Obama on food and climate change: 'We can still act and it won't be too late'
Mapping the world's climate hotspots and identifying where the impacts will be the greatest is increasingly important for governments, advocacy groups and others who need to prioritise resources, set goals and adapt to a warming world.
But lack of data and different priorities make it hard. Should scientists pinpoint the places most likely to see faster than average warming or wetter winters, or should they combine expected physical changes with countries' vulnerability? Some hot-spot models use population data. Others seek to portray the impacts of a warming world on water resources or megacities. Global bodies want to know how climate might exacerbate natural hazards like floods and droughts. Economists want to know its impacts on resources. Charities want to know how it will affect women or the poorest. 
What follows is a subjective appraisal of the seven most important climate hotspots, based on analysis of numerous scientific models and personal experience of observing climate change in a variety of places. Delta regions, semi-arid countries, and glacier- and snowpack-dependent river basins are all in the frontline. But so, too, are tropical coastal regions and some of the world's greatest forests and cities. 
                   Murcia, Spain                   
For Wolfgang Cramer, scientific director of the Mediterranean Institute for Biodiversity and Ecology in Aix-en-Provence, France, climate change impacts are already visible not only in the vicinity of Murcia, but across much of the Mediterranean basin. If pledges to cut emissions are not met, catastrophe looms. 
He and his colleague Joel Guiot, a paleoclimatologist, last year studied pollen locked in layers of sediment over the past 10,000 years and compared them with projections about climate and vegetation from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
If warming is allowed to rise to 2C, the scientists concluded, much of southern Spain and the Mediterranean basin could become desert. Their paper, published in Science, was shocking because it showed that even a small temperature increase could be enough to create ecological havoc in a very heavily populated region with relatively wealthy countries.
They warned that North African countries would see increased temperatures and drought that would drive the southern deserts further north; that deserts would expand in the Middle East, pushing temperate forests higher into the mountains; and that ecosystems not seen in the Mediterranean basin in more than 10,000 years could develop.
"We are more certain of the drying trend in the region than almost anywhere else on the planet. Temperatures have risen 1C globally but 1.4C in the Mediterranean region. The trend is for it to become ever warmer," says Cramer.
 Related:  Europe faces droughts, floods and storms as climate change accelerates
Increasing temperature, he says, drives droughts. "More carbon dioxide in the atmosphere means rising temperatures, less precipitation and then more drying that leads to desertification."
Meanwhile, water stress, heat waves and an extended drought linked to climate change in the eastern Mediterranean has been widely implicated in the long Syrian war and an underlying driver of conflict in Middle East and North African countries. 
The World Resources Institute concurred in 2015 that the Mediterranean basin was a climate hotspot when it placed 14 of the world's 33 most water-stressed countries in 2040 in the Middle East and North Africa region. "Drought and water shortages in Syria likely contributed to the unrest that stoked the country's 2011 civil war. Dwindling water resources and chronic mismanagement forced 1.5 million people, primarily farmers and herders, to lose their livelihoods and leave their land, move to urban areas, and magnify Syria's general destabilisation," it said. 
The fast-growing, heavily populated region is climatically vulnerable, it concluded. The food supplies and the social balance of places like Palestine, Israel, Algeria, Lebanon and Jordan are all highly sensitive to even a small change in water supplies. As climate change intensifies, communities face grave threats from both droughts and floods. 
The combined impact of many more people, higher temperatures and changing weather patterns on the region's already scarce freshwater resources poses further potential for conflict. But optimists hope it could force compromise between competing states and water users. Rural areas already have no option but to switch to more efficient irrigation systems and drought tolerant crops, and urban areas are learning to conserve water. 
                   Dhaka, Bangladesh                   
I met Honufa soon after she arrived in Dhaka 10 years ago. Erosion and saltwater intrusion on her family's land on one of the low-lying islands in the mouth of the Ganges River had forced the young Bangladeshi woman to leave her village for the capital. She had taken a boat and then an overnight bus and ended up in a slum called Beribadh.
Honufa is a climate refugee, one of thousands who have struggled to grow their crops. Millions are likely to follow her if current trends continue.
"In the next 20 years we would expect five to 10 million people to have to move from the coastal areas," says Saleemul Huq, director of the Bangladesh-based International Centre for Climate Change and Development. "The whole country is a climate hotspot, but the most vulnerable area is the coast. Dhaka is the place where people head to," he says. 
 Related:  On the climate change frontline: the disappearing fishing villages of Bangladesh #GlobalWarning
Huq, who has advised the Bangladesh government at successive UN climate summits, says there is strong evidence that climate change is now impacting Dhaka. "Temperatures have already gone up by 1C. We can see that the weather patterns have changed. Ask anyone in the street, and they will say the frequency of floods has changed. Bangladesh has a long history of floods, but what used to be a one-in-20-year event now happens one year in five. It is what we would expect with climate change models."
Huq and other Bangladeshi climate scientists expect to see more extremes. "Changing rain patterns suggest we will not get more rain over the coming years but it will be distributed differently, with less in the dry season and more during the monsoons. Paradoxically, this will lead to more floods and droughts, and heavier monsoons," he says. 
"We are beginning to see sea levels rising and increased salinity in coastal areas. It is a slow onset, which will get worse. It is a climate change phenomenon and not something we had before."
Huq leads research into how Bangladesh can adapt to climate change. "We've done a lot of research looking at the most vulnerable hotspots. We are learning by doing," he says. "Government has now invested in a major climate change action plan. To counter coastal salinity there is a big program of rainwater harvesting and coastal protection. Scientists are developing saline-tolerant rice. People and government are proactive. 
"The trouble is that we are always catching up with the problem. There is a limit to what we can grow. At some point we will run out of options, then people will have to move. We know that if we don't take action people will all end up in Dhaka, so [we] need to invest in other towns and cities."
                   Mphampha, Malawi                   
Late last year, the temperature in southern Malawi in southern Africa rose to more than 46C. A long regional drought crossing Zimbabwe, Zambia, Madagascar and Tanzania had scorched and killed the staple maize crop and millions of people who had not seen rain for more than a year depended on food aid. 
 Related:  'I was so hungry I ate water lilies': southern Africa's food crisis in a dozen dishes | John Vidal
Long-term climate data in southern Africa is sparse, but studies backed by oral evidence from villagers confirm the region is a climate hotspot where droughts are becoming more frequent, rains less regular, food supplies less certain, and the dry spells and floods are lasting longer. 
With more than 90% of Malawi and the region depending on rain-fed agriculture, it does not need scientists to tell people that the climate is changing. I sat down with villagers near Nsanje in the south of Malawi.
"I know what it is to go hungry," says Elvas Munthali, a Malawian aid worker. "My family depended on farming. The climate is changing. Now we plant maize at the end of December or even January; we used to do that in November." 
Patrick Kamzitu, a health worker in Nambuma, says: "It is much warmer now. The rains come and we plant but then there is a dry spell. The dry spells and the rains are heavier but shorter."
One of best studies comes from the Chiwawa district near Nsanje, close to the Mozambique border. Detailed research by the University of Malawi, backed by 50 years of rainfall and temperature data, established that rains, floods, strong winds, high temperatures and droughts were all becoming more common.
The story is more or less repeated across southern Africa and backed by governments and scientific modeling. USAid, the African Development Bank, the World Bank and IPCC assessments suggest average annual temperatures rose nearly 1C between 1960 and 2006.
Looking ahead, scientists expect average annual temperatures across southern Africa to soar, possibly as much as 3C by the 2060s, to 5C by the 2090s - a temperature that would render most human life nearly impossible. But estimates vary greatly. Rainfall, says USAid, could decrease in some places by 13% and increase in others by 32%.
All African countries know that they must adapt their farming, restore their forests, improve their water supplies and grow their economies quickly to have any chance of surviving climate change. But the adaptation money pledged to these, the world's poorest countries, by the rich at successive UN climate summits has barely started to trickle through.
 Related:  Modern agriculture cultivates climate change - we must nurture biodiversity
Changes could be catastrophic. In North Africa, Egypt could lose 15% of its wheat crop if temperatures increase 2C - 36% if they rise 4C. Morocco expects crop yields to remain stable up to about 2030, but then to drop quickly afterward.
Conversely, a study of 11 west African countries from the International Food Policy Research Institute expects some farmers to be able to grow more food as temperatures rise and rainfall increases. Climate change may mean Nigeria, Ghana and Togo can grow and export more sorghum, raised for grain.
But most African countries are extremely vulnerable to climate change and have no reason to expect it will improve their lot. Instead of waiting for western money, they are pressing ahead where they can with water conservation, tree planting and small-scale irrigation schemes. Drought and flood resistant crops are being adopted by the few, but the odds of more severe droughts and floods are high and the resources to resist them are slim. 
                   Longyearbyen, Norway                   
The temperature in Longyearbyen on the Svalbard archipelago about 650 miles from the North Pole, averaged about -4C in April. If that sounds cold, consider that it was nearly 8C warmer than the 30-year average for the time of year, and that April was no outlier. The average temperature for the whole of 2016 in Longyearbyen was near freezing. Usually it is -10C.
 Related:  Thawing Arctic is turning oceans into graveyards
"No region on the planet is experiencing more dramatic climate change than the Arctic," says Kim Holmén, international director of the Norwegian Polar Institute, who has lived on and off in Svalbard for 30 years. Although he is unsure precisely why temperatures are rising so fast there, he says, "make no mistake, there has never been a run of temperatures like this ever recorded." 
Holmén works at the Zeppelin research station at Ny-Ålesund, where 11 countries study climate change, air quality and ice. "Water temperatures on Svalbard have increased 10C or more in my time here," he says. The fjord, which used to be covered with ice one-metre thick in winter, no longer freezes over. "We see temperatures changing, snow melting earlier, new species of fish. We are seeing big unexpected changes."
Longyearbyen, home to some 2,100 people, is on borrowed time, Holmén says. "There have been two avalanches there in the last year, both defined as 1,000-year events. These are the types of events we expect to see increasing. A whole part of Longyearbyen may have to be abandoned. 
"The changes taking place now will influence [many other places]. The global climate is clearly influenced by the Arctic. There will be ramifications everywhere. We already see more precipitation in northern Scandinavia and low pressure weather systems taking a more northerly route."
Holmén is backed by Julienne Stroeve, professor of polar observation at University College London. I first met her in 2012 on a Greenpeace ship which steamed north from Longyearbyen to within 300 miles of the pole across a sea that would normally be iced over. She spoke from Cambridge Bay in the Canadian high Arctic.
"2017 is already setting records," she says. "There was a record low [ice cover] for March this year, so that makes six months in a row with record [or near record] low ice conditions. There are many ways the Arctic is changing. You see it in melt season starting earlier than it used to and taking longer to freeze up, in the melting of the Greenland ice sheet and the Arctic glaciers, the warming of permafrost temperatures, in increased coastal erosion, the northward migration of the tree line and species, and in how local communities can no longer keep their food in the ground because the thaw increased." 
 Related:  Could a £400bn plan to refreeze the Arctic before the ice melts really work?
Both Stroeve and Holmén are by nature cautious scientists, not given to dramatic statements. But both say they are astonished, even scared, by the speed at which the Arctic changes are happening. 
"Given our current emission rates of 35 to 40 gigatons [of carbon dioxide] per year we should see ice-free conditions in September in about 20 years," says Stroeve. 
Longyearbyen residents are getting used to more extreme weather and coming to terms with what it means for them. The town has created a new risk assessment map and an avalanche warning system. Some parts of the town may be deemed unsafe and will have to be moved. Others may be protected by snow fences or walls.
"What is happening here is a very obvious case of climate change with consequences for animals, plants and humans," says Holmén. It is happening across the Arctic much faster than we thought possible, and I expect now to see an ice-free Arctic in 20 or so years." 
                   Manaus, Brazil                   
When Carlos Nobre, one of Brazil's leading climatologists, lived in Manaus in the 1970s, the population was a few hundred thousand and the highest temperature ever recorded in the city had been 33.5C. The city was surrounded by cool, dense forest and the greatest river on Earth. Heat waves were rare and floods regular but manageable. 
Today Manaus has more than 2 million people, and it and the wider Amazon region are changing fast. In 2015, Nobre says, the temperature in Manaus soared to 38.8C. "The Amazon is tropical and very hot, but when I lived there the hot spells were rare," he says. "Now we see many more of them." Not only that, he says, but dry seasons are longer by a week than they were a decade ago and weather is more erratic. 
Nobre notes that tree loss is exacerbating the effects of climate change. "In many parts of continental South America one sees about 1C warming in the Amazon, which can [be] mostly attributed to global warming. In areas like Rondônia, where there has been widespread deforestation, we see an additional 1C warming due to replacement of forest - which is a high-evaporating vegetation - to pasture, which is less evaporating."
 Related:  Record-breaking climate change pushes world into 'uncharted territory'
Hot spells in such a humid climate are a real hazard to health. Yet adaptation to climate change in a teeming, poor city like Manaus is non-existent for the many people who must struggle just to survive. For the middle classes, air conditioning is now essential. The most city authorities can do is plant trees to cool the streets and protect the river banks from flooding.
The great uncertainty is how far the drying of the Amazon could affect the rest of the world. "If you change the rainfall in the Amazon, you could transport the impacts very far away," Nobre says. "According to my calculations, there will be a lot of impacts in southeastern Brazil and also over equatorial Africa and the US. But we cannot pinpoint what will happen." 
Perhaps most ominous is the fact that a positive feedback loop appears to be in play. As the Amazon dries, Nobre says, tropical forest will gradually shift to savanna, releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and further adding to global warming.
"When we see a dry season of over four months, or deforestation of more than 40%, then there is no way back. Trees will slowly decay, and in 50 years we would see a degraded savanna. It would take 100-200 years to see a fully fledged savanna."
The Amazon then would be unrecognizable, along with much of Earth. 
                   New York, US                   
New York state may seem an unlikely climate hotspot, but research confirms its status in the top league of potential change. Drawing on the US national climate assessment and research by leading federal agencies and academics, it calculates that temperatures statewide have risen about 1.3C since 1970, spring begins a week sooner than it did just a few decades ago, there is less winter snow and more intense downpours. Meanwhile, sea levels are rising at nearly twice the global rate and birds and fish populations are all moving north.
Even more dramatically, the latest scientific projections suggest trouble ahead. By the 2050s, says the New York Department of Environmental Conservation, sea levels could rise nearly 76cm (30 inches), storm surges and flooding will be more common in coastal areas, and West Nile virus and many other diseases could be prevalent.
 Related:  The fight against climate change: four cities leading the way in the Trump era
But, says Carl Pope, climate advisor to the former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg, if climate change is to be addressed, it must be led by big cities like New York, which release nearly 70% of the global emissions but also have the capacity to create solutions.
"Cities will always trump countries when it comes to climate change," he says. "Cities are where emissions are. They are mostly consumers of fossil fuels, so they would like to use them as little as possible; they have a natural instinct to save on fossil fuels. Also, they are not very ideological. Improving quality of life is seen as a good."
Mayors, Pope says, are now well ahead of most governments, leading attempts to reduce air pollution which contributes heavily to climate change, and eager to introduce electric cars and renewable energy. "There is a great public will to improve the quality of life in cities," he says. 
Pope identifies three groups of cities which he thinks will lead others on climate: "Cities in Nordic countries that will be meticulous about everything. Then there are a few in Latin America and Africa, which will be unbelievably creative. A third group is in east Asia and China, which will do things on a massive scale."
                   Manila, Philippines                   
When Typhoon Haiyan struck the city of Tacloban in November 2013, Yeb Sano was the Philippines' climate commissioner. He was distraught when I met him. He believed that his brother who lived there had been killed along with many thousands of others. 
One hour later Sano broke down as he addressed the world's diplomats. It was the third super typhoon to hit the Philippines in three years, and five of the 10 strongest typhoons had come in the previous eight years. "Climate change is real and now," he told them in tears.
The Philippines is regularly ranked in lists of the top few countries most affected by climate change. "We are already experiencing climate change impacts, including sea-level rise, hotter temperatures, extreme weather events and changes in precipitation," says Sano, who has now left government to direct Greenpeace SE Asia. 
"These in turn, result in human rights impacts, such as loss of homes and livelihoods, water contamination, food scarcity, displacement of whole communities, disease outbreaks, and even the loss of life."
Scientists widely agree that the country, along with nearby Indonesia, Vietnam and Cambodia, is a hotspot. Analysis of 70 years' of government data, published in the International Journal of Climatology last year, shows a small decrease in the number of smaller typhoons that hit the Philippines each year, but more intense ones. It is not conclusive evidence, but previous studies have suggested the increase may be due to rising sea-surface temperatures since the 1970s.
 Related:  Rebuilding after Typhoon Haiyan: 'Every time there is a storm I get scared'
There is no doubt temperatures are rising on land. In Manila and the surrounding metropolitan area, which has a population of more than 12m, the tropical storms are more intense, the floods are more frequent, the nights are hotter and there are fewer cool days, says the state meteorological office, Pagasa.
"There has been a significant increase [in the last 30 years] in the number of hot days and warm nights and a decreasing trend in the number of cold days and cold nights," Alicia Ilaga, head of climate change in the government's agriculture department, told me in 2015. "Both maximum and minimum temperatures are getting warmer. Extreme rainfall events are becoming more frequent. In most parts... the intensity of rainfall is increasing."
It's not just Manila feeling the heat. In its latest 2014 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says it expects life in major Asian and African coastal cities like Manila, Guangzhou, Lagos, Ho Chi Minh City, Kolkata and Shanghai to worsen as temperatures rise. 
"Urban climate change-related risks are increasing (including rising sea levels and storm surges, heat stress, extreme precipitation, inland and coastal flooding, landslides, drought, increased aridity, water scarcity, and air pollution) with widespread negative impacts on people (and their health, livelihoods, and assets) and on local and national economies and ecosystems," it says. "These risks are amplified for those who live in informal settlements and in hazardous areas and either lack essential infrastructure and services or where there is inadequate provision for adaptation." 
Food supplies are also threatened. I visited the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) outside Manila. This research centre, funded by the world's richest nations to develop better strains of the crop that feeds nearly half the world, has seen temperatures soar.
A few years ago, IRRI's deputy director general, Bruce Tolentino, called climate change the greatest global challenge in 50 years. "The challenge now is to rapidly adapt farming to climate change with modern varieties and feed a fast-growing global population, half of which depends on rice as a staple food. One billion people go hungry every day. In the 1990s, rice yields were growing 2% a year; now they are just 1%. Temperatures here have risen 2-4C. Climate change will reduce productivity. Rainfall is unpredictable and rice is grown in areas like deltas that are prone to sea level rises. We have to gear up for more challenging agro-ecological conditions, we need to be able to use swampy areas and develop varieties that can be grown in salty or flooded areas."
IRRI has been working to develop rice varieties that can withstand extreme climatic conditions such as droughts, floods, heat and cold, and soil problems such as high salt and iron content. New drought-tolerant varieties that can produce up to 1.2 metric tons more per hectare [0.54 tons per acre] than varieties that perform poorly under drought conditions have been introduced to India, Nepal and elsewhere.
"Every city and every sector of society in the region is at risk," says Sano. "The IPCC tells us it will probably get 4C warmer. That means everything will be compromised, from food and energy to settlements. We are not ready. The challenge is too huge. We are very vulnerable."
                   The bottom line                   
Whether it's faster than average warming, more vulnerable than average populations, or more severe than average drought, floods and storms, it's clear that some places are being hit harder than others by Earth's altered climate, and so face extra urgency when it comes to adapting to a new reality.
But the bottom line is that climate hotspots intersect, and nowhere will we escape the changes taking place. What happens in the Amazon affects West Africa; the North American growing season may depend on the melting of Arctic ice; flooding in Asian cities affected by warming on the high Tibetan plateau. And urban areas ultimately depend on the countryside. 
We're all in a hot spot now. 
    • This article was originally published by Ensia

Load-Date: June 23, 2017


End of Document




Climate change study in Canada's Hudson Bay thwarted by climate change; Warm temperatures create perilous ice conditions off Newfoundland, trapping fishing boats and tankers: 'It's not something you would expect to see there'
The Guardian(London)
June 14, 2017 Wednesday 10:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 511 words
Byline: Ashifa Kassam in Toronto
Body


Scientists in Canada have been forced to abandon an expedition to the Hudson Bay to research the impact of climate change, after warming temperatures created perilous ice conditions off the coast of Newfoundland. 
In late May, 40 scientists from five Canadian universities set off from Quebec City on the icebreaker and Arctic research vessel CCGS Amundsen. The expedition was the first leg of a four-year, C$17m research project designed to delve into the effects of climate change on Hudson Bay. 
 Related:  Cold snap: massive iceberg just off coast draws Canadians eager for close-up
The icebreaker was soon diverted. Dense ice - up to 8 metres (25ft) thick - had filled the waters off the northern coast of Newfoundland, trapping fishing boats and ferries. 
"It was a really dramatic situation," said David Barber, the expedition's chief scientist. "We were getting search and rescue calls from fishing boats that were stranded in the ice and tankers that were stranded trying to get fuel into the communities. Nobody could manage this ice because it was far too heavy to get through."
Barber, a climate change scientist at the University of Manitoba, and the other scientists did what they could to help the Coast Guard rescue the vessels and carved a path for the tankers. They also took the time to study the ice that surrounded them, discovering that much of it was the multiyear ice typically seen in the high Arctic.
It was an unexpected find, said Barber, given the time of year and how far south they were. "It's not something you would expect to see there and not something we've seen there before," he said. "In the high Arctic, climate change is causing the ice to get thinner and there to be less of it. What that does is that it increases the mobility of ice."
The decision to cancel the first leg of the expedition was made after it became clear that continuing north would interrupt search and rescue operations and probably put lives at risk. 
 Related:  Arctic stronghold of world's seeds flooded after permafrost melts
The irony was not lost on Barber. "We're doing a large-scale climate change study and before we can even get going on it, climate change is conspiring to force us to cancel that study." 
The decision was a costly one, as the project had already spent hundreds of thousands of dollars getting the scientists and their gear on the vessel. The next leg of the expedition, scheduled to start on 6 July, is expected to go ahead, but the study will probably need to be extended by at least six months and may require more funding, he said. "It's a real mess." 
Barber - who has spent decades researching the impact of climate change on sea ice - described his week spent on the frontlines of battling a changing climate as a stark reminder of the reality the world is facing. "We're very poorly prepared for climate change," he said. "We pay lip service to the fact that we think we know it's coming and society is trying to grapple with the complexity of it, but when it really comes down to brass tacks, our systems are ill prepared for it."

Load-Date: June 14, 2017


End of Document




Australia faces potentially disastrous consequences of climate change, inquiry told; Former defence force chief decries Australia's response to climate challenge as a 'manifest failure of leadership'
The Guardian(London)
August 10, 2017 Thursday 7:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 1366 words
Byline: Ben Doherty and Michael Slezak
Body


Military and climate experts, including a former chief of the defence force have warned that Australia faces potential "disastrous consequences" from climate change, including "revolving" natural disasters and the forced migration of tens of millions of people across the region, overwhelming security forces and government.
Former defence force chief Adm Chris Barrie, now adjunct professor at the strategic and defence studies centre at the Australian National University, said in a submission to a Senate inquiry that Australia's ability to mitigate and respond to the impacts of climate change had been corrupted by political timidity: "Australia's climate change credentials have suffered from a serious lack of political leadership". 
 Related:  Glencore's Wandoan coalmine wins approval from Queensland government
The inquiry into the security ramifications of climate change also heard from some of the country's leading climate scientists, who warned the security threats posed by climate change had been underestimated, and complained Australia had been "walking away" from exactly the type of research that would help the country prepare.
Other experts, however, counselled against "alarmist" predictions and said the focus of climate change response should be on those people most acutely affected by it, rather than the security concerns of developed countries most able to respond. 
                     Barrie said the security threat of climate change was comparable to that posed by nuclear war, and said the Australian continent would be most affected by changing climate.
"We will suffer great effects from these changes, such as new weather patterns; droughts, sea-level rises and storm surges, because we have substantial urban infrastructure built on the coastal fringe; ravages of more intense and more frequent heatwaves and tropical revolving storms." 
But he said the existential impacts of climate change were likely to be first, and most severely, felt across Australia's region, the Asia-Pacific rim, the most populous region in the world, and one that will be home to seven billion people by 2050. 
Barrie posited a scenario in which the glaciers in the Tibetan Plateau and Himalayan-Hindu Kush ranges - which reliably deliver fresh water into China, the Mekong Delta, Myanmar, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan - would disappear.
 Related:  Commonwealth Bank shareholders sue over 'inadequate' disclosure of climate change risks
"A serious shortage of fresh water brings famine; starving people are a very serious security problem. The question then becomes 'what will happen if starving people on the rim of Asia are looking for a new home?'
"Historical evidence suggests that under such circumstances mass migration of these people will occur. It follows that several tens of millions of people might seek better fortunes in Australia and possibly New Zealand.
"Most other options for settlement in our region would already have high population densities. Our security forces, and all arms of government, would be overwhelmed in such a scenario."
The Australian Defence Force has been examining the potential insecurities caused by climate change for a decade. Within Defence, there are serious concerns over the vulnerability of military bases to climate impacts, and the military's reliance on fossil fuels.
But Barrie said political action lagged far behind and Australia's hyper-politicised debate over climate had hampered decisive government action.
"Our current posture is a manifest failure of leadership," he said.
Scientists at the ARC Centre for Climate Extremes, led by Andy Pitman from the University of New South Wales, said in their submission that climate scientists could help the country prepare for these sorts of threats but that investments in the required work was not occurring.
They noted many assessments of the threats to national security posed by climate change may be an underestimation, and called for a "high-level taskforce to examine risks associated with climate change and national security".
"Most assessments linking climate change with climate risk have assumed changes are well described by the average," they said, arguing this needed to be "urgently modified".
They said that focusing on average temperature rise masks more serious changes that will occur in relation to extreme events and "compound events".
"We do not know where or when extreme events will hit, which regions will become less vulnerable and which regions will suddenly emerge to be vulnerable," they say. 
They said those problems could be solved, but that Australia was not devoting enough research to the issue.
They also noted that while infrastructure and systems are often built to be resilient against isolated events - such as sea-level rise or a storm - that design often assumes they will happen in isolation, but if they occur together they could be "catastrophic".
Again, the scientists said Australia was not focussing on the topic and noted that the US was examining compound events including the co-occurrence of droughts and heatwaves.
"Australia lags behind the US and some European countries in examining, assessing and responding to climate-change risks in terms of national security," they said.
"Vulnerabilities associated with national security and climate change are already increasing and exist now. These are not 'future issues' that can be left for a decade before strategies are considered. The creation of a high-level taskforce to examine risks associated with climate change and national security is urgent and overdue."
Jane McAdam, director of UNSW's Kaldor centre for international refugee law told the inquiry climate change functioned as a "threat amplifier", that magnified risk and exacerbated existing crises.
"Disasters become disasters on steroids: more frequent and more intense. Climate change is also a process. Slow-onset impacts such as sea-level rise or desertification take place over time, resulting in a gradual deterioration of living conditions that ultimately renders land uninhabitable."
But she said the prospect of massive, sudden international migration was highly unlikely, and focused on the wrong people.
"Reasoned, empirically-grounded analysis has too often been overshadowed by alarmist and ill-informed assumptions about the numbers of people on the move, and the nature of that movement. As a result, the security analysis has been 'flipped' away from the needs of the most vulnerable communities to instead focus on the national security of developed states, premised on the flawed notion that they will be inundated by people fleeing the impacts of climate change."
McAdam said most displacement and migration would occur within countries, not across national borders.
"Longer-term movement will generally be gradual rather sudden, and movement that is sudden (for instance, in the aftermath of a disaster) will often require temporary relief rather than permanent migration. There is scant evidence to justify claims that there will be mass outflows of people across international borders which will threaten international, regional or national security, or generate new risks of Islamist terrorism or fundamentalism."
McAdam said internal displacement could generate low-level social tensions and potential conflict over key resources such as land, housing, food, water and employment.
The parliamentary inquiry has also heard climate change has already contributed to and worsened conflicts across the world, including in Mali, Yemen, and the Arab Spring and civil war in Syria from 2011.
The International Committee of the Red Cross said the destruction of the natural environment or access to scarce resources was often used as a weapon of war.
"In armed conflict, the natural resources on which people rely are often attacked in contravention of IHL [international humanitarian law] provisions. This can take the form of theft or killing of livestock, theft of land, drainage or poisoning of water resources, destruction of places of trade and livelihood. Removing the basis of communities' resilience and capacity to adapt to changing weather conditions imperils their survival and contributes to displacement and poverty."

Load-Date: August 10, 2017


End of Document




'We've turned a corner': farmers shift on climate change and want a say on energy; National Farmers' Federation head Fiona Simson says people on the land can't ignore what is right before their eyes· Podcast: Why farmers are getting behind the science on climate change
The Guardian(London)
June 30, 2018 Saturday 12:48 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1024 words
Byline: Katharine Murphy, political editor
Body


Out in the bush, far from the ritualised political jousting in Canberra, attitudes are changing. Regional Australia has turned the corner when it comes to acknowledging the reality of climate change, says the woman now charged with safeguarding the interests of farmers in Canberra. 
Fiona Simson, a mixed farmer and grazier from the Liverpool plains in northern New South Wales, and the president of the National Farmers' Federation, says people on the land can't and won't ignore what is right before their eyes. "We have been experiencing some wild climate variability," Simson tells Guardian Australia's politics podcast. "It's in people's face".
"While we are a land of droughts and flooding rains, absolutely at the moment people are seeing enormous swings in what would be considered usually normal. They are getting all their rainfall at once, even though they end up with an annual rainfall that's the same, it's all at once, or it's in so many tiny insignificant falls that it doesn't make any difference to them.
"And the heat. We've had some record hot summers and some weird swings in seasons".
Simson acknowledges there are "always going to be some outliers who are going to have some wild ideas" in farming or in any other sector of the Australian economy but she says "overwhelmingly, I think it's got to the point where the science is very acceptable".
The shift under way in the bush has filtered through to lobbyists lane in Canberra. Only a few years ago, when the then Labor government put a price on carbon, legislating a market mechanism to drive emissions reduction at least cost, the NFF rose in full battle cry against the heresy. But now, the NFF stands at the front of a phalanx of business groups trying to support the Turnbull government through the deeply fraught business of landing the national energy guarantee.
Simson isn't trying to pretend black is white. She acknowledges the Neg looks a whole lot like the emissions trading scheme that her group shouted down only a couple of years ago. "I think the Neg for us is some sort of ETS potentially. It certainly talks about carbon and putting a value on that. There will be a price on that and there we go."
People are really frustrated at the moment with the politics
  Fiona Simson    
She says it's time to see the climate change-driven transition under way in the energy market as opportunity, rather than something to resist. "I think farm representation and farmers generally have come quite a long way in their attitude to climate, and climate change and climate variability and dealing with all of these things, and accepting some of the facts behind the science."
"We have turned quite a corner ourselves, and our approach now to this is quite different than it was in those days [when Labor pursued emissions trading], when the [previous NFF] leaders chose that path."
She is supportive of the efforts of the agriculture minister, David Littleproud - a next-generation Queensland National - to reset the resting disposition for the Nationals on climate change and energy. Littleproud is happy to acknowledge that climate change is happening and he characterises the shift to renewables as "exciting".
But the Nationals are lagging their communities on the issue. The party remains split on climate change and energy, and on the Neg. Some are trying to cook up a coal transition fund as the price of supporting the policy, but if that's the price of entry, Labor federally and the Labor states might veto the framework before it can ever get off the ground.
Simson says dissenters need to get out of the road of a settlement. Consensus needs to be reached because the damage inflicted by the last decade of policy warfare is going to take time to unwind, and the key to unwinding the destruction is policy certainty. "I have some sympathy for [the Nationals] because I know that our sector has had some wide-ranging discussions to come to the agreement that we have."
"But at the end of the day, that's their job".
She says politicians "need to stop picking winners. This is not about coal versus renewables... it's a bit like a farm, we are probably going to need a bit of everything. Surely, let the market decide is the best way rather than one politician thinking what's going to be the technology of the future".
Simson notes that Australian farmers love markets. They are entirely comfortable with competition. So the same rules should apply to the energy market. "For us it is very important that the policy be technology neutral, and let the market decide."
She says politicians also need to understand that voters have had enough of the internal intrigues and the brinkmanship. "People are really frustrated at the moment with the politics, whether it is internal politics and infighting within the parties, or whether it is party against party. People are wanting now to have outcomes. People are facing skyrocketing energy prices. Some of my members are facing bills triple what they were a few years ago."
So while there are still questions to answer about the detail of the policy framework, the Neg must be approached as opportunity. Simson says affordability, reliability, technology neutrality is fundamental, and the farm sector needs a tailored solution where emissions reduction can be built into the core of the business. "We think there are a lot of opportunities for small-scale energy generation and it's already happening".
"We would particularly like to take advantage of some of the heat generation that some of our intensive industries are using. For example, the pork industry has been amazing at capturing methane and then using that as energy generation - all the manure, the slurry going into the pits, having the methane captured and then driving a lot of the technology."
"Things like that on farm are amazing opportunities."
She says farms are often at the end of the power grid and are not well served by the status quo. She says the Neg framework could allow farmers to band together, and small communities to band together, to build their own energy infrastructure.
"We can work with this general framework. There is lot of opportunity".

Load-Date: June 30, 2018


End of Document




Anthony Albanese says public wants 'practical' action on climate change - as it happened; Michael McCormack sees off Nationals leadership challenge from Barnaby Joyce, while Adam Bandt is elected Greens leader. This blog is now closedMichael McCormack sees off Barnaby Joyce in National party leadership spillAdam Bandt pledges to push for Australian Green New Deal after being elected Greens leaderJacqui Lambie wants deal on union-busting bill 'as soon as possible'
The Guardian(London)
February 3, 2020 Monday 9:05 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:19
Length: 14148 words
Byline: Amy Remeikis
Body


block-time published-time 6.12am GMT 
Tomorrow is the first official day of parliamentary proceedings - we'll have question time and legislation to discuss, and we'll probably even manage to get through the day without a leadership spill, so that should be great. 
Parliament starts at 9, but the blog will be up and running before that, so I do hope you'll tune in. I'll need the company and the laughs.
A very big thank you to everyone who came along today - and especially to Mike Bowers, Sarah Martin and Paul Karp  for helping me through the mess this morning. 
 Katharine Murphy is in Sydney for a work event but she is, as always, keeping her fingers on the pulse.
We'll wrap up early while we have the chance - tomorrow we will see a return to the usual scheduling, and who in 2020 knows what that actually means.
Thanks again - and take care of you. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.14am GMT
block-time published-time 5.51am GMT 
 Tim Wilson is now getting upset about not being able to give the government talking points on what it is doing on reducing emissions. He is pulled up by Patricia Karvelas  for giving "a list" saying her viewers deserve more, but Wilson says that means he won't be able to answer the question. 
He then moves on to the Kyoto credits, as Karvelas request:
 I don't think we need to use our Kyoto carryover credits. The whole argument about Kyoto carryover credits is frankly absurd.  
Carryover credits were a condition the Labor party put in, in terms of the negotiations. 
The whole point of carryover credits is to encourage countries to take action earlier than they commit internationally. 
Because it means there's actually value and incentive to do so. Removing it an argument for governments to invest in less reduction. 
It's the most bizarre logic I think I have heard. In the end, I don't think we need to use them. 
We'll be in a position to cut our emissions consistent with our international obligations but as I've said, if people want to delay and encourage countries not to take action, by scrapping carryover credits, all they're doing is saying that for accounting purposes, they would rather countries did less.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02am GMT
block-time published-time 5.48am GMT 
 Ed Husic, who looks like he has been put into the ABC's smaller studio (Tim Wilson is in the big one) also has some things to say about the Nationals' actions today:
Firstly, I would like to have a chance to comment on what's happened today. I mean, today was about commemorating, it was about respecting, it was about thanking those who fought the bushfires and all we had was this disgraceful self-indulgence from the Nationals that turned this into a farce leading into what was supposed to be a day that all sides of politics got together to talk about the very things just mentioned a few moment ago, the human story of the bushfires and we didn't have that because of the Nationals. 
Then you go into a Coalition party room where some of the Nationals want to, including Barnaby Joyce, again, defy community sentiment and the concern that is palpable and real that climate change is having an impact on people's living environments, it's impacting on their ability to survive in their areas, and having real life consequences, life and death consequences on people. 
And they still want to maintain that nothing should be done, very little should be done, on this. 
And I think, people are saying, loud and clear, as they have for quite some time, one, we should be taking climate change seriously and doing what we can to reduce emissions and to play a part as a nation in tackling this issue. I just think what we saw today, as I said before, was utter disgraceful self indulgence by the Nationals.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.03am GMT
block-time published-time 5.47am GMT 
 Tim Wilson is now on Afternoon Briefing on the ABC. He is asked about the Nationals hijacking today - which was meant to be about the bushfire victims: 
I suspect they acknowledge it themselves. I don't think their desire was particularly to deal with this way. But what's been done has been done. And soon as it's over, the focus is rightly on bushfire victims, the families, the communities affected by the awful fires over this summer period. 
A number of members of parliament now are making sure they're giving speeches, talking about the human stories, families who lost their homes, the small businesses that have lost customers, the communities that have lost much of both their physical and their emotional structures, and the need and necessity to rebuild. 
And the prime minister, I think, gave a very good speech talking about how today is not the day to talk about policy, as much as possible, the focus should be on the experiences people have had, and what we need to do to make sure we rebuild as a community and a country.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.03am GMT
block-time published-time 5.45am GMT 
For those who wanted to see more of the leaders' speeches today: 
enltrToday we gather to mourn, honour and reflect on the Black Summer that continues. We also give thanks for the selflessness, courage, sacrifice and generosity that met these fires time and again, and continue to. #Watch my full speech            https://t.co/ptXuesfKqX           pic.twitter.com/7Vxb9NeWSi
 - Scott Morrison (@ScottMorrisonMP) February 4, 2020
enltrThis is not fire as usual. As we turn to face the harsh new reality that confronts Australia, we remember those we have lost. We honour those left behind. We thank those who have been fighting to keep us safe. pic.twitter.com/JviNebNVcA
 - Anthony Albanese (@AlboMP) February 4, 2020
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.14am GMT
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese also gives a hint of where Labor will go this year, in terms of attack: 
You've got pattern of behaviour here - and interestingly, with the sports rorts saga, you have just such an obvious, blatant, industrial-scale rort, and you have the government saying, "There's nothing to see here." You have a government that's prepared to say, "Don't worry about what the auditor-general said, we'll worry about what the prime minister's former chief of staff says" and continuing to justify this behaviour.
... Even though the government has released its talking points for today to the entire press gallery and everyone else, and I've got a copy of that, we tend to not release our tactics pack a day in advance. We'll have a discussion tomorrow morning, but I would be very surprised if sports rorts don't get a reasonable run over the next week, and indeed, months, because there has been no transparency here. 
We still don't have a list of those clubs that missed out that had high scores in favour of clubs that basically got almost zero - one club got four out of 100, and got funding, and another club who made an application got 98 and didn't get funding. So work out that.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.48am GMT
block-time published-time 5.27am GMT 
On the Greens leadership change ( Richard Di Natale  resigned yesterday, to spend more time with his family), Anthony Albanese tells Patricia Karvelas : 
Look, our opponent is the coalition, and that is what we're focused on. The Greens remain essentially a Senate-based party. We'll see how it works having their only member of the House of Representatives as the leader. 
But I don't see that it will make an enormous difference. From time to time, Adam Bandt's rhetoric is more extreme than Richard Di Natale's rhetoric was, but we'll wait and see how that plays out. 
The truth is that I'm running for Prime Minister against Scott Morrison, not against the Greens or Clive Palmer  or One Nation or anyone else.
block-time published-time 5.24am GMT 
For those desperate to see them.
enltrAnyone care for some leaked PMO talking points? pic.twitter.com/8TetRvG9qQ
 - Alice Workman (@workmanalice) February 4, 2020
But honestly - you do see them. They say this stuff almost verbatim.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.27am GMT
block-time published-time 5.20am GMT 
On climate action, Anthony Albanese says: 
My view is that climate change is a serious issue and the public want action on it. What they want is action that is practical, that makes a difference, that reduces emissions - that's what my framework is. 
They want to see emissions going down, because they understand that also Australia can't do it by ourselves. Australians want our nation to speak up strongly in international forums - we're not doing that at the moment. We went to Madrid and argued for a weaker target, not stronger action, by arguing that somehow you could have carry-over credits and do an accounting trick, rather than actually reduce emissions. 
But one thing Australians have been doing for some time, Patricia, is voting with their wallets. 
They're putting solar panels on their roofs. 
They're taking action to reduce their own carbon footprint, because they know that just as good action on climate change is good for jobs, lowers emissions and lowers prices, their own individual action is lowering their household bills as well.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.30am GMT
block-time published-time 5.18am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese  says he was surprised to not be consulted over the head of the royal commission, given the bipartisan way the parties have been working together on the fires:
I am, frankly. I would have thought that common courtesy should mean that that occur. During recent months, the opposition - we have put forward a range of constructive suggestions. 
We wrote, of course - I wrote to the prime minister on 22 November last year, calling for a Coag meeting to get better national coordination, calling for greater involvement of the defence force, calling for economic compensation for volunteer firefighters, for a range of measures including an increase in our aerial firefighting capacity - all measures that were eventually, with the exception of Coag, the meeting, eventually happened. 
After - at the beginning of the process being rejected by the prime minister. Even today sitting in the parliament and the nature of it is something that I wrote to Scott Morrison about at the beginning of January, and called for, so we've continued to put forward a constructive suggestion. 
I would have thought that consultation about the terms of reference was a very basic thing that should happen.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.29am GMT
block-time published-time 5.16am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese is speaking to Patricia Karvelas on Afternoon Briefing on the ABC. He is asked about the bushfire royal commission: 
Well, I think there is some doubt over it, but it is a decision for the government rather than the parliament. Certainly the Prime Minister didn't have the courtesy of consulting Labor about the appointment of  Mark Binskin. 
He is obviously a very distinguished person, but I would have thought that on an issue like this, the opposition should have been at least consulted. Certainly there is a range of inquiries, there is the official ones from New South Wales and Victoria, but of course the loss of life means that there will be coronial inquiries as well, and we have a range of other reports and inquiries that have been held in the past. 
What we need to do is to make sure that the starting point is looking at what the recommendations have been, looking forward in terms of what - what issues might need to be taken up, taken further, and the opposition also hasn't been consulted on the terms of reference. So we'll wait and see what the terms of reference of any such royal commission would be.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.29am GMT
block-time published-time 5.10am GMT 
Hilariously, a lot of One Nation's policies also fall under the umbrella of socialism.
No one tell them. 
enltrCorrect. pic.twitter.com/cuaQc3U18a
 - David Shoebridge (@ShoebridgeMLC) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 5.09am GMT 
The PMO talking points, which go out to ministers and MPs as a "this is what you need to say in answer to any questions on these topics" have been found for today.
No big red flags so far - it is as you would expect - and the government loves when we run its talking points, so you won't get giant slabs
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.12am GMT
block-time published-time 4.38am GMT 
 Greg Hunt has thanked New Zealand for its assistance in evacuating Australians from Wuhan:
Immediately prior to coming here, the advice I had at this stage we're anticipating over 50 Australians. And again, special thanks to New Zealand for their cooperation. And the advice I have is that if they are to come to Australia, if they're not housed in New Zealand, then again, prior to coming here, the anticipated plan is we'll be supporting them on Christmas Island.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am GMT
block-time published-time 4.35am GMT 
The UK's foreign secretary,  Dominic Raab, is on their way for a visit.
From Marise Payne: 
It is Mr Raab's first overseas trip since the UK left the European Union on Saturday, in a clear demonstration of the strength of the enduring partnership between our two countries.
With the UK's exit from the EU, we enter a new era of strategic and economic cooperation. There is much to discuss, and to look forward to, in deepening our relationship, not least a comprehensive and ambitious free trade agreement.
Together, Australia and the UK will continue to protect and promote the rules-based international order, in the face of an increasingly complex strategic environment.
We will find new opportunities for enhanced engagement with the UK in the Indo-Pacific, including on infrastructure, development, security and promoting human rights and the rule of law.
We will strengthen our cooperation in the Pacific, harnessing the growth of both our diplomatic footprints in the region. Despite our geographic distance, we have clear strategic interests in common, including a secure and prosperous Indo-Pacific.
Australia is ready to launch negotiations on a high-quality UK FTA as soon as the UK is in a position to do so. We want to pursue an agreement that creates new commercial opportunities for Australian exporters and further deepens investment ties with our fourth-largest source of foreign direct investment.
Australia is grateful for the support and solidarity the UK has shown us during our ongoing bushfire crisis. A UK team was in Australia in January to look at how best to assist with our recovery and how we might cooperate on managing future fire seasons.
Such help, readily offered between close friends, epitomises the enduring partnership between our two nations.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.40am GMT
block-time published-time 4.31am GMT 
 Jim Chalmers  has responded to the RBA rate decision - it remains unchanged at 0.75%.
Interest rates are just a quarter of what they were during the depths of the Global Financial Crisis and yet the Morrison Government continues to leave all the heavy lifting to the Reserve Bank.
In his statement today, the RBA Governor noted that "The household sector has been adjusting to a protracted period of slow wages growth" which "is expected to remain at around its current rate for some time yet".
Australians are struggling, weak consumption is being driven by stagnant wages, household debt is at record highs, almost two million Australians are looking for work or for more work, but the Liberals and Nationals have no plan to turn things around.
For too long the Prime Minister and Treasurer have recklessly left the Reserve Bank to do all the work instead of coming up with a plan to support the economy.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.42am GMT
block-time published-time 4.30am GMT 
 Greg Hunt  has an update on the coronavirus situation: 
... It remains there are 12 confirmed cases in Australia. Two in South Australia, two in Queensland, four in Victoria, and four in New South Wales. And three of those in New South Wales are clear of the virus and have been discharged. As the cases of suspected or potential coronavirus emerge, they're being tested by the state authorities. I want to thank and acknowledge the work of all the state and territory authorities. 
I want to give a status on the flight from Christmas Island, and I have just been briefed prior to coming in, into this room, by the head of the National Critical Care and Trauma Response Centre.
They run the Ausmat team, the Australian medical assistance team, on the ground on Christmas Island and was part of the flight crew attending to passengers. 
All travellers, I'm advised, are examined, have been examined, and there are no cases of confirmed coronavirus. Fourteen were looked at more closely to ensure they were in an acceptable condition and they have now all been cleared of the virus. A further two are being tested as a precaution. 
The advice from the Ausmat team on the ground is, however, they regard the likelihood, or the probability, of coronavirus in that case as being minimal, but nevertheless they are being tested. 
A pregnant woman and her partner on the flight are now in isolation in Perth.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.45am GMT
block-time published-time 3.44am GMT 
That sort of glowing tribute from a resources lobby group is to be expected - you may remember the first time Matt Canavan resigned from cabinet (during the section 44 stuff) he said it had been an "honour to represent the mining sector".
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.48am GMT
block-time published-time 3.40am GMT 
The Minerals Council of Australia have released a statement, paying tribute to Matt Canavan: 
Senator Canavan delivered untiring and passionate support for Australia's minerals companies and workforce and regional communities as a Cabinet Minister in the Morrison Government.
He worked closely with the MCA and our member companies to secure and maintain the growth and success of Australia's resources industry to create new jobs, strengthen regional communities and drive economic growth. 
In particular, mine workers from pits to ports across the country appreciated Senator Canavan's staunch support for their jobs and industry. 
Most recently, he established the Critical Minerals Facilitation Office to help Australia become a global supplier of rare earths and critical minerals. Advances in computing, manufacturing, energy and transport are being made possible by critical minerals found in Australia. 
 The next minister for resources and northern Australia will have big shoes to fill as they build on Senator Canavan's passionate advocacy for the development of Australia through a globally competitive and sustainable minerals sector. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.44am GMT
block-time published-time 3.39am GMT 
Back to China's response to Australia's travel ban, this is what the embassy official had to say about why Beijing believes its citizens should be compensated: 
I mean, if, for example, they suffer if they suffer a loss, for the rejection by February 2, they were rejected, they have to pay their ticket back but they were not properly alerted on February 1 - it's not reasonable, right? 
But if, after February 2, I think most students and Chinese citizens learned about the restriction measures.
 It's not technically feasible to enact a decree on the day of its announcement. 
We understand the anxiety of the Australian government and society but, for measures, they need to be reasonable. Under preventative measures, actually we think WHO - when it announced this coronavirus epidemic as a public health emergency of international concern, it didn't recommend any restrictions over international travel and trade. Actually, it opposes such measures. 
We are not happy that United States took the lead in enacting such a strict restriction measures over Chinese citizens.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.45am GMT
block-time published-time 3.34am GMT 
The RBA has held interest rates at 0.75%
block-time published-time 3.33am GMT 
[cont from previous post]
It is also understood that in the earlier meeting of Liberal MPs, MP for the Queensland seat of Bowman, Andrew Laming, slapped down other conservative MPs for publicly denying the science of climate change. 
Morrison thanked local MPs for being there for Australians who were doing it tough as a result of the summer bushfire crisis and said today's sitting of parliament was a "solemn" occasion to acknowledge those affected by fires.
"They are our absolute focus going into this year," Morrison said.
Following the turmoil in the Nationals party room, Morrison also urged harmony between the Liberals and Nationals, saying they had joined forces to "do things together".
"Australians demand us to continue to be a team working together. Together is how each of us can best serve this country. McCormack acknowledged that many people were hurting, but regional Australia was full of "strong people who would bounce back".
"Regional Australia is not broken ... they need our support and strength in line with their own strength." 
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the government focus was on stable economic management to ensure the country "got through these tough times" to deliver the support that people needed.
There was also general discussion on the government's response to fires, the problems in the tourism sector as a result of the fires and the response to coronavirus.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39am GMT
block-time published-time 3.32am GMT 
 Nationals leadership spill leads to Coalition climate change debate  
Nationals and Liberal MPs met this morning following the Nationals ballot, which saw Michael McCormack survive the challenge from Joyce and elected David Littleproud as deputy leader.
 Matt Canavan addressed the partyr oom after resigning his position from cabinet, telling colleagues he would not be seeking reappointment and extending his congratulations to McCormack and Littleproud.
He used his speech to thank the party room fo the "honour" of serving in cabinet and said he was proud of the work he had been able to achieve in the resources portfolio. 
He also said he believed the Coalition parties had become the party for workers. "We have become the party of workers, workers in coalmines, workers in shipyards and workers in factories," Canavan said.
"We represent those people by fighting for their jobs, and defending their jobs."
Joyce also spoke. He said the leadership vote was part of the Westminster system, but he was pleased it was short and we could all move on.
He added that he had faced fire and drought in his communities, and warned that some people were pursuing "reactionary" policies, which he described as "pushing their hobby-horse issues out of tragedy".
The comments formed part of a broader partyroom discussion on climate change, with several MPs expressing the view that more ambition on climate change was needed.
Those speaking strongly in favour of the need and importance of embracing new technologies included Katie Allen, Tim Wilson, Fiona Martin  and  Trent Zimmerman.  
Nationals MP  George Christensen  was the strongest voice against more ambitious climate action. 
The argument was put that the government needed to be "mindful" of the impact on regional jobs of any change to climate change policy, particularly in seats which had supported the Coalition at the last election.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41am GMT
block-time published-time 3.29am GMT 
The official goes on to say China expects "proper compensation" for those caught up in the ban: 
Over the past few days, we were in close touch with Home Affairs, Foreign Affairs, DFAT, Immigration, and most of our Australian counterparts are quite cooperative. They understand the situation of those students. 
So that's why most of them were cleared and they entered Australia and they will abide by and follow the recommendations of the health authorities. At the same time, we are very concerned about the interests of the Chinese students who will not be able to come Australia over the next 14 days - 12 days, actually. We are in touch with the universities and also with the education ministry to sort out a proper solution for these students. 
 We hope their rights and interests will be safeguarded, including proper expansion of visa if the validity is over, and also maybe proper compensation for some of the financial losses during this period. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41am GMT
block-time published-time 3.27am GMT 
 China not happy with handling of Australia's coronavirus travel ban  
A Chinese embassy official has given journalists an update on China's reaction to the coronavirus. (I missed his name at the beginning of the briefing, so apologies.)
He spoke a little about Australia's travel ban and how that has affected some Chinese citizens, including students. The key takeaway: China is not happy with how it has been handled. 
It is the Australian government who made the decision, those restriction measures, and on February 1, after the announcement, there are still some people who already departed from China and, on February 2, about - some say 50, some say 70 people, most of them are students - were stranded in the airport in Sydney, Brisbane, and some in Melbourne.
 We are not happy about this situation because they were not alerted - there's not enough time to be alerted about the restriction. 
We get in touch with relevant authorities and ministries. As far as I know, most of them are finally cleared. 
Of course, we encourage all the Chinese citizens, the students, who entered Australia after February 1 to abide by the measures that's suggested by the Australian government, including the self-isolation measures. 
But at the same time, we hope their legitimate right and the interest will be secured. But there are still a number of people who are still stranded in Brisbane, and a few of them were actually already sent back to China, for which we are not pleased about what happened, because they were not alerted about the restrictions.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43am GMT
block-time published-time 3.07am GMT 
 Matt Canavan, who started yesterday by publicly committing to Michael McCormack as leader, before ending the day resigning from cabinet to support Barnaby Joyce as leader, has released a statement saying he will "now commit to supporting Michael and the Coalition as a senator for Queensland". 
enltrSenator @mattjcan congratulates Michael McCormack and David Littleproud            #NatsSpill           #auspol           pic.twitter.com/wvOtuk8gUM
 - Political Alert (@political_alert) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 3.02am GMT 
For those who like the procedural side of things, there is the motion, supported by all sides, to suspend parliament procedures for today's bushfire condolence motion:
enltrLeader of the House @cporterwa has moved to suspend the standing orders as follows. Prime Minister            @ScottMorrisonMP is now introducing a motion of condolence for bushfire victims.            pic.twitter.com/06Wu51UadI
 - Australian House of Representatives (@AboutTheHouse) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 3.01am GMT 
 Kristina Keneally  is calling on the government to allow temporary migrants and backpackers to volunteer in bushfire zones, given that many won't be able to work in the regions because of the bushfire emergency, which could have a massive impact on their visa status in that they could lose it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.20am GMT
block-time published-time 2.57am GMT 
 Sarah Martin has just alerted me to more South Australian Liberal fights, as reported by InDaily: 
Several sources have confirmed that assembled Right members voted to exclude Barker MP Tony Pasin, Boothby's Nicolle Flint and recently-elected Senator Alex Antic from future meetings - effectively purging them from the Liberal Right.
The trio, whom sources described as from the "Hard Right", are in Canberra this week and did not attend the meeting, although it's understood they were offered the chance to take part in a teleconference.
Pasin did not respond to questions except to say: "There was a meeting last evening [and] we indicated we weren't in a position to participate."
Neither Antic nor Flint responded to inquiries.
You can read the article here
Looks like Simon Birmingham is pushing to move the SA Libs back to the centre quite hard - and winning. So far. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
The Nationals president Larry Anthony just had a chat to Lucy Barbour on the ABC about the leadership spill this morning: 
I agree it wasn't good timing, I accept that and I do hope from right now, as they move forward to this day, which is a very important day, as you point out, to the condolences for those people who have lost their lives and lost their homes today. 
Look, it is messy. Sometimes democracy is messy. But this is what happened today, and we have a clear result now for Michael McCormack. 
On the question of whether or not he thinks there would be another spill, Anthony says: 
Look, I can't mind read into the ambitions of people. I certainly think in the short-term, absolutely not. I mean, there's been a decision made today. I think it's been accepted. 
One of the tragedies, I think, out of this, is that we've lost Matt Canavan. And I think that he did the honorable thing yesterday - a very capable minister. But nevertheless, he's still in the Parliament and he'll continue to make a major contribution.
What does Anthony think that contribution will be?
Well, I think that they'll have a lot more time on their hands. I think you've got two former Cabinet ministers in Bridget McKenzie and of course Matt Canavan, so I think that they'll apply themselves to the parliamentary places, to representing those regions. So they'll still be very active. But they are eight not going to have portfolio roles.
block-time published-time 2.43am GMT 
It turns out that Black Summer is already the name of a Netflix zombie apocalypse series where "complete strangers band together to find the strength they need to survive and get back to loved ones".
block-time published-time 2.37am GMT 
It has just been pointed out that, right now, the Nationals have no ministerial representation in the Senate - the first time that has happened in 15 years.
It's the Nationals centenary this year. It's going well. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.42am GMT
block-time published-time 2.25am GMT 
 Scott Morrison spoke about this in his speech:
The generosity of the rest of the world was also so humbling. Seventy nations offered us assistance. 
Over 300 firefighters sent from the United States, Canada and to New Zealand, to whom we are so grateful. 
We also had offers of assistance from the UAE, which is greatly appreciated. Military assistance from New Zealand, the United States, Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea, Singapore, Japan, our wonderful family in PNG and Fiji. 
 When the 54 engineers from the Republic of Fiji military forces arrived in Melbourne, they placed their hands over their heart and they sang a hymn, "Angels Watching Over Me", and they have been to us.  
Our Pacific family has been so incredibly generous.
enltrFijian defence force personnel sing while assisting Australia's bushfire recovery - video https://t.co/Y2MIMm7y0l
 - Lenore Taylor (@lenoretaylor) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 2.14am GMT 
Labor caucus also discussed the legislative agenda, resolving to support a range of non-controversial government bills.
However it will oppose the government's move to overhaul the family court system - first flagged by Christian Porter in 2018 - and the Coalition's revamped Ensuring Integrity bill.
Caucus resolved to support changes to the research and development tax incentive in the House, but the party will reserve its final position until the Senate economics committee reports on the bill.
Various views were put forward by MPs, including concern about how it might affect technology start-ups, and Australia's very low rate of research and development spending (1.8%) compared to the best practice of 4% in some countries. Another MP said there was a "huge political opportunity" to campaign on the issue, given its importance to the manufacturing industry.
There was also some discussion about government plans to allow employees to opt out of the superannuation fund nominated in workplace agreements - often at the behest of unions - with shadow minister for financial services, Stephen Jones, saying the party was considering amendments.
In the discussion of the bushfires, several MPs spoke about the impact on their communities, including Susan Templeman  (Macquarie), Fiona Phillips (Gilmore) and Mike Kelly (Eden Monaro).
Kelly said his local economy had been "smashed" by the fire crisis, and also expressed concern about the lack of a national climate change policy.
In response, Anthony Albanese said a climate change policy would deliver "more jobs, lower emissions and lower prices".
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44am GMT
block-time published-time 2.10am GMT 
 Michael McCormack  is the first to go the "current fire season is not without precedent" line.
Sigh. 
As it does, of course, we consider what has been done well and what we can do better to protect even more lives and assets into the future. I know there are things we can and must do. 
This must be our focus in the months and weeks ahead. There is a legitimate policy debate to be continued.
 I fully accept that climate change is an important part of this. There is no single cause for the fires.  
I know that fuel loads and build-up must be part of our forward thinking. I stress again the actions of arsonists warrant strong discipline to discourage a repeat of such dangerous antisocial, life-threatening behaviours. 
 This current fire season is not without precedent. We know that we've had fires in this nation before. 
These have been dreadful, though. There is much to be done.
 Communication from fire authorities in the various states through communities and emergency service personnel has been consistently strong. 
We thank them for that. Of course, there is also room for improvement, but I believe our forebears would be proud of just how much we've made the most of modern technology to keep people alert to trends, to help preparation for the fire when it does arrive.
block-time published-time 1.49am GMT 
 Michael McCormack is up now, and he'll be followed by Richard Marles.
Then we have speeches from MPs whose electorates were directly impacted by the fires. And then the rest of the night will speeches from all other parliamentarians - practically everyone is on the list - but they will be limited to about five minutes or so, so parliament doesn't go until 2am. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.21am GMT
block-time published-time 1.47am GMT 
There was one direct mention* in Anthony Albanese's  speech.
He said this: 
So what now? Yes, fire is part of who we are. Our recorded history is heavy with its grim poetry. Ash Wednesday, Black Friday, Red Tuesday, Black Saturday, but we are at a turning point. 
This is not business as usual. This is not even fire as usual. We can no longer fall back on the poetry of Dorothea MacKellar  and comfort ourselves with the thought that it's always been like this, that this is the price we pay for living on a beautiful but sometimes harsh and unforgiving continent. 
Nor can we soften reality with the fiction that we had no way of predicting this. 
We have no choice but to turn to face the harsh new reality, the scale and intensity of the fires has been unprecedented. 
But the responses to the fire from our fellow Australians has been completely as expected. 
There has been toughness, resilience, generosity and, amazingly, through it all, there has been a sense of humour. 
All of these qualities have been put to the test during this time of fire and Australians have shown their true character. In this time of upheaval, the only certainty we have is that they will be tested again. We must be ready
*This has been amended from an earlier post, which said there was no direct mention of climate change. My fault, as I missed it in the transcribing. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.16am GMT
block-time published-time 1.45am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese  has also thanked David Littleproud for his handling of the crisis: 
I want to acknowledge the fact that Minister Littleproud has returned every call and has responded to every request that I have made, which has been pretty regular, it's got to be said, working with our shadow minister, Murray Watt. 
We are guided by a single thought, that, as Australians, we are all in this together. Working together is our only way forward. I have every confidence that, as Australians, that is what we will do.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.20am GMT
block-time published-time 1.43am GMT 
enltrHonoured to join families of Geoff, Andrew & Sam at Parliament House Canberra today. PM @ScottMorrisonMP invited families of fire fighters tragically lost this season, for a Condolence Motion & Morning Tea. Young Harvey just loved his Parliament House vegemite sandwich.            #NSWRFS           pic.twitter.com/uhZxYdrL4G
 - Shane Fitzsimmons (@RFSCommissioner) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 1.39am GMT 
 Scott Morrison labels the 2019/20 fire season 'Black Summer'  
 Scott Morrison has termed the bushfire emergency "Black Summer".
In past times, when Australia has been tested by fire, we have given the fires a name, based on the name of the day or locality. 
Black Thursday, in 1851, Black Friday in 1939, Ash Wednesday in 1983, the Canberra bushfires of 2003, and Black Saturday in 2009 - just saying these words brings back such chilling memories. 
This year, we have faced, and we are still facing, a terrible season of fire, national in scale, fires that reached our highest mountain range and our longest beaches, fires that consumed forests, grasslands and farms, suburbs, and villages, fires that jumped rivers and highways, fires where days became night, and the night sky turned red, fires that raged into the heavens as clouds of fire - with it all, a merciless smoke that lingered across our cities, fires that still burn. 
And the smoke from burnt bushland that left an oppressive tightening in our chest told us that all was not right. 
This is the Black Summer of 2019-20, that has proven our national character and resolve, a national trauma best described by Indigenous leaders, who love our land so much, as a grief for the victims, a heartache for our wildlife, and broken heart for the scouring of our land. 
These fires are yet to end and danger is still before us in many, many places, but today we together to mourn, honour, reflect and begin to learn from the Black Summer that continues. 
And to give thanks for the selflessness, the courage, and the sacrifice and generosity that met these fires time and again and continue to. Many of the stories of our Black Summer we will never know.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.42am GMT
block-time published-time 1.36am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese has begun his speech.
Both leaders have paid tribute to those who died in the fires, and the firefighters - professional and volunteers - who continued to head out day after day.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.16am GMT
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 Scott Morrison finished his speech with some information on the royal commission which has been called to look at the bushfires: 
The royal commission will be led by former chief of the defence force, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin AC and will shine a light on what needs to be done to make our country safer and our communities more resilient. 
We owe it to those we have lost. We owe it to those who have fought these fires. We owe it to our children, and the land itself, to learn from the lessons that are necessary. 
Mr Speaker, over a century ago,  Henry Lawson  wrote a poem about a bushfire in a place called Dingo Scrub. 
"It is daylight again and the fire has passed, and the black scrub silent and grim. Except for the blaze of an old dead tree or the crash of a falling limb."
In his reminiscence, he writes about three men who wipe away tears of smoke and put themselves in harm's way to save a family and when the fire has passed, he writes of the men:
"When they're wanted again, in Dingo Scrubs, they'll be there to do the work." 
And that's what we'll all do, here in this house and across Australia, to do the work, to do the work of recovery to build back better. 
To do the work of learning, to do the work of repairing shattered hearts, broken communities. That is what we owe our country. That is what we owe each other. Australians are overcomers. 
Despite the scale of this disaster and the tragedies, Australia is not and will never be overwhelmed. As we face the challenges that remain active, as we confront and face the devastating drought, compounded in so many places by these fires, as we confront and contain the challenge of the fire risk that threatens the world, Australians will not be overwhelmed. 
We will overcome, as our national anthem encourages us with courage all, let us proclaim, advance Australia fair. 
So I conclude in memorial, I conclude in thanks, I conclude in honour to those we have lost, and the deepest of our sympathies and condolences to you and we just simply hope and pray that, as we've gathered here today to acknowledge your great loss and the heroes you have lost, that this will make your journey just that little bit easier.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.19am GMT
block-time published-time 1.29am GMT 
 Scott Morrison has just concluded his speech on the bushfire emergency after speaking for about 20 minutes.
To my count there was one mention of climate change in the speech, which came towards the end here:
Mr Speaker, following a national disaster of this magnitude, we must also heed the lessons. These fires have been be fuelled one by one of the worst droughts on record. 
 Changes in our climate and a build-up in fuel amongst other factors. Our summers are getting longer, drier and hotter. That's what climate change does. And that requires a new responsiveness, resilience and an invigorated focus on adaptation.
Today, I've written to the premiers and chief ministers to seek their feedback on a draft terms of reference for a royal commission that I have flagged now for several weeks along the terms that I've outlined in public. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.31am GMT
block-time published-time 1.17am GMT 
 Mike Bowers  has had to head to Sydney for a work engagement
enltrAuspic have captured Prime Minister @ScottMorrisonMP rising to move a motion of condolence for bushfire victims in the House.            pic.twitter.com/QsD1g2gZ3A
 - Australian House of Representatives (@AboutTheHouse) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 1.16am GMT 
Over in the Senate,  Bridget McKenzie has been confirmed as the Nationals senate leader.
 Matt Canavan will be her deputy.
The Labor side of the Senate laughed at this news. 
block-time published-time 1.15am GMT 
 Scott Morrison is delivering his condolence speech on the bushfires.
I'll bring you some of that in a moment.
block-time published-time 1.02am GMT 
Parliament has begun - prayers offered and now we move into the condolence motion for the bushfire victims.
The rest of the day will be speeches. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.15am GMT
block-time published-time 12.55am GMT 
 Anthony Albanese has addressed MPs in Canberra for the first caucus meeting of 2020.
The opposition leader began by reflecting on the summer break and the widespread criticism of Morrison's leadership during the bushfire crisis.
We were not critical of his trip to Hawaii but people were deeply critical of his claim that people wanted to be fighting fires.
"I've never seen anything like the behaviour of Morrison. He forced a woman to shake his hand and then turned his back on her."
On sports rorts, Albanese said it was an "outrage and a scandal" and referred to projects that missed out, as well as our story about the rugby club that received a grant despite not having a women's team. 
Albanese also criticised the prime minister for relying on the report of Philip Gaetjens  and not the auditor general's report in his assessment of Bridget McKenzie's  conduct. 
Labor will pursue the issue in parliament this week. 
Following a briefing of MPs by the chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, Labor MPs discussed the issue of coronavirus. 
The shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, said he had sought information from the government about the economic impact of the virus and the travel ban, while Bill Shorten raised concerns about racism directed at Chinese Australians.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.18am GMT
block-time published-time 12.53am GMT 
Pretty much, yup
enltrBecause the Nats party room has only five Senators and the other three are first-termers. #Natspill           https://t.co/XRwBcchlqd
 - Kevin Bonham (@kevinbonham) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 12.52am GMT 
Looks like there will be a second Australian flight from Wuhan 
enltrWe are in close consultation with Chinese authorities about a possible second assisted departure flight from Wuhan to Australia. As always, we will put the health and safety of all Australians first. Thanks to the Chinese Government for its cooperative approach.
- Marise Payne (@MarisePayne) February 4, 2020
block-time published-time 12.52am GMT 
The bells are about to ring, bringing parliament back for 2020.
I mean, Belgium once went 589 days without a government and it seemed to do OK, but you know, democracy. 
block-time published-time 12.45am GMT 
 Barnaby Joyce releases statement after leadership spill loss  
 Barnaby Joyce has released his statement: 
I would like to congratulate Michael McCormack in winning the leadership ballot and by so doing re-endorsement of his position as leader of the Nationals party.
 It is appropriate that if an issue needs resolving as to contentions held, there is a procedure to resolve it as is noted in our parliamentary system. That process has been followed and the issue is finalised. This was made as brief as possible prior to the first sitting of parliament for the year.
 I support the vote of the room and will strive for the re-election of a Morrison McCormack government as this is definitely the better outcome for Australia and especially of regional people.
 Now my first attentions go back to where they were before this week, the New England, drought, fires and now the threat of coronavirus.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.50am GMT
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
The RBA will make its interest rate decision today.
It will most likely remain stable.
It's a big week for the RBA governor though.
 Phil Lowe has the interest rate decision today, the Press Club address in Sydney tomorrow and on Friday it is the quarterly statement on monetary policy - and Lowe will also appear in front of the parliamentary economics committee.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.41am GMT
block-time published-time 12.28am GMT 
 Barnaby Joyce  is expected to issue a statement in the very near future.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31am GMT
block-time published-time 12.27am GMT 
That leaves Matt Canavan  to say and talk to whomever he wants about whatever he wants.
The cabinet muzzle is off. 
block-time published-time 12.26am GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie is reportedly the Nationals Senate leader, according to three Nationals MPs I have just spoken to. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31am GMT
block-time published-time 12.10am GMT 
The parliament will sit at 12 - it is a day of ceremony and condolence.
So there won't be any question time or legislation entered today.
That fun starts tomorrow.
Then we have another week of sittings next week, followed by a week's break, and then a second sitting fortnight.
So plenty more days for these guys to blow up the show in another way.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.30am GMT
block-time published-time 12.06am GMT 
 Greens lay out Green New Deal  
 Adam Bandt on the Greens priorities under his leadership: 
A Green New Deal is a government-led plan of investment and action to build a clean economy and a caring society. 
And these two elements of a Green New Deal - government taking the lead to create new jobs and industries, and universal services to ensure that no one is left behind - are the values that I have been fighting for my whole adult life. 
I joined the Labor party at high school, and I left at university because Labor started putting up fees for education and putting people into so much debt. It was inconsistent with my values. 
It meant that people like my father, who was the first person in his family to go to university, were going to face barriers that no one should have to face. 
As a lawyer, I fought big corporations on behalf of clothing outworkers, and also represented firefighters and even coal workers battling with privatisation. 
And in my seat of Melbourne we have brought together people from public housing to young families, and that is what a Green New Deal is going to do as well. Because it provides a vision of the country that takes on the challenges that we are facing, that everyone is able to get behind. 
And we're going to talk a bit more about the Green New Deal and how it addresses these climate crises, the jobs crisis and the inequality crisis, over the coming months. 
But let me just give you three things at the moment that I'll be fighting for as part of the Green New Deal: first is get dental into Medicare. 
That is unfinished business for us in the power-sharing parliament back in 2010. We managed to get dental into Medicare for kids, and we need to do it for everyone across the country. 
Second, make education genuinely free. And the first cab off the rank for us at the moment is going to be targeting those fees that people who are sending their kids to public schools are being forced to pay. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.30am GMT
block-time published-time 12.02am GMT 
 Adam Bandt: 
We are facing a climate emergency, a jobs crisis, an inequality crisis, and the government's only response is to shrug and say, "Well, get used to it, because this is the new normal." 
Well, I refuse to adapt to kids wearing gas masks. 
I refuse to accept a society where people put off having children because they are feeling so insecure about their jobs and their life. 
And I refuse to accept people living in poverty in a country as wealthy as ours. And I refuse to accept the dismal standard of this government, led by Scotty from marketing, whose love of coal has contributed to these fires that we are seeing at the moment, and the climate emergency we are facing. 
And I refuse to accept the dismal standard of a Labor so-called opposition who chooses the middle of bushfires to celebrate coal, and who votes with the Liberals to give tax cuts to millionaires. 
We are a smart and wealthy country, and if we have the guts to take on the big corporations and the weak politicians that they have in their pocket, we can solve these crises. We need a Green New Deal.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06am GMT
block-time published-time 12.01am GMT 
 Adam Bandt :
A couple of weeks ago, when I dropped my kids off at childcare, the air was so dangerous that the warning on my phone showed someone wearing a gas mask. 
Summer is going from a time to relax to being a time where people fear for their life and their health. 
People are angry and anxious because it is clear that the government does not have the climate emergency under control and has no plan to get it under control. But people are also anxious and angry because, in this country, the basics of life are no longer guaranteed. 
Go to Tafe, go to university, study hard, and you could find yourself underemployed in a job with insecure hours and low wages. 
Get yourself a job and you can find yourself unable to afford a house because the government has rigged the market against you. 
We are becoming a country where, even if you do the things that everyone has asked of you, you are no longer guaranteed a good life. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.07am GMT
block-time published-time 11.50pm GMT 
Not exactly a happy camper - Barnaby Joyce  captured by Mike Bowers.
    Barnaby Joyce leaves the Nationals party room after Michael McCormack was re-elected as leader. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian   
Winners aren't grinners. 
    Michael McCormack backed by his new deputy David Littleproud. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.45pm GMT 
The numbers being floated in the Nationals leadership spill - 11 to 10 - are coming from Barnaby Joyce's camp, which is obviously invested in keeping the rumblings going.
We don't know the actual numbers because the whip hasn't released them. 
 Michael McCormack's  camp disputes the numbers. But they don't know them either.
They have put the numbers more at 15 to 6
It would be much easier if the whip just announced it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.27am GMT
block-time published-time 11.25pm GMT 
Outside the parliament, there is a people's rally for the climate.
The speaker's list is as follows: 
10.30: Rebekha Sharkie, fed. Indep. MP, SA 10.45: Zali Steggall fed. Indep. MP, NSW; petition presentation from Natasha Deen, Save our Oceans 11:15: Mark Butler, fed. ALP MP, SA; former Minister for Climate Change, 2013  TBA - Mehreen Faruqi, Greens Senator for NSW
11.30*: Adam Bandt, Greens climate crisis spokesperson
*Bandt has moved from 11am to 11.30 because of his press conference 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.24pm GMT 
One Nation has not changed leaders in the past two years.
Who would have thunk it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.22pm GMT 
From Adam Bandt's statement (which was put out VERY quickly, pointing to the Greens knowing pretty early that there was only ever going to be one candidate for the leadership position): 
"We are in the middle of a climate emergency and long running jobs and inequality crises. People are angry and anxious because the government has no plan for the big problems facing the country. "That is why Australia needs a Green New Deal. "A Green New Deal means government leading the country in transforming our economy, creating new jobs and industries powered by clean energy and delivering universal services like dental into Medicare and genuinely free education. This is what I will be fighting for. "We are a smart and wealthy country and if we have the guts to take on the big corporations and the weak politicians they have in their pockets, we can solve the problems we face. "I call on everyone, but particularly young Australians, to join our movement for a Green New Deal so together we can fight to save the future." 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.21pm GMT 
 Adam Bandt has called his first media conference as leader: 
Adam will use his first media conference as leader to call for a government-led Green New Deal to tackle the climate emergency and the jobs and inequality crises. Adam will also make a strong pitch to young people to join the movement for a Green New Deal. 
That will be at 10.45.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.20pm GMT 
The Nationals are still working out who their Senate leader will be.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.15pm GMT 
So Nick McKim snuck in there as a surprise third candidate for the second deputy spot - he beat out both Sarah Hanson-Young  and Mehreen Faruqi. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.14pm GMT 
 Adam Bandt is officially Greens leader  
 Larissa Waters will be the Greens Senate leader and co-deputy.
The second deputy is Nick McKim.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.13pm GMT 
We are still waiting on the Greens to emerge from its party room - the hold-up is the deputy decision.
 Adam Bandt is the leader (uncontested).
The deputy fight is between Larissa Waters  (a pretty sure bet) and then Sarah Hanson-Young  and Mehreen Faruqi  for the second deputy spot. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.10pm GMT 
Just a clarification on the Matt Canavan  lower house tilt I mentioned a few posts below. Nothing is confirmed - it is all just Queensland chatter at the moment. I spent a few weeks in the greatest nation on earth over the summer (bung lungs meant I actually couldn't breathe in Canberra) and that is what the LNP was talking about. 
But nothing would happen (if it does) until a general election. We are not going to see a byelection.
The LNP were also talking about the ongoing battle between Amanda Stoker and James McGrath for the one Liberal spot (even if Canavan leaves the Senate ticket, it is a Nationals spot) - that, too, is a very interesting and long-term fight.
Who ever loses that has a choice: try to rebrand as a National (not fondly looked upon) or try for the lower house. If I was Andrew Laming, I would be keeping an eye on that. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.05pm GMT 
I just checked in - the AFP has still not decided whether or not to take up the  Angus Taylor investigation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.01pm GMT 
So with Bridget McKenzie  out of cabinet, along with Matt Canavan, that opens two spots.
 Darren Chester  will move up. He wanted emergency services so I think he'll probably get that, after his performance during the fires in his electorate and his unwavering backing of Michael McCormack.
 Keith Pitt is a strong chance for a look-in. David Littleproud  is a chance to get agriculture back. He lost it to McKenzie in the reshuffle - and was sidelined by McCormack, so don't expect that to be an easy relationship.
 Michelle Landry is in line for a junior ministry. She was a Barnaby Joyce backer who fell in under McCormack's leadership early and hasn't budged. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.57pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack claims it is over.
(cue side eye lols)
I think we need to draw a line in the sand and concentrate on the fire victims. 
There's been many who have lost loved ones. Our thoughts go to them. There's been many who lost their businesses, their homes, lost their farms. That's the people we're going to be concentrating on. 
I think today is a day where we reflect upon those. We concentrate on what we need to do for the recovery efforts, the relief efforts and providing, continuing to provide, the assistance we have already done and to that end, I know the government has acted very responsibly, very quickly, to help those fire victims and we will continue to do that. This clean-up is not going to take weeks or months, it's going to take years. The National party, the government, will be there for those people.
You know the problem with lines in the sand? They are very, very easily brushed over. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.54pm GMT 
It seemed those prayers worked this morning - Scott Morrison will absolutely be breathing a sigh of relief after that result. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.53pm GMT 
enltrOne of the McCormack supporters has told me "we dodged the first bullet" #auspol
 - Kieran Gilbert (@Kieran_Gilbert) February 3, 2020
block-time published-time 10.51pm GMT 
On the question of Matt Canavan ?
Matt Canavan has resigned as resources minister, I wish him the best," says Michael McCormac k.
So he's out of the cabinet.
 Keith Pitt  is probably the big winner out of that. But then they have to do something with the women as well, because - they've just lost one.
 Michelle Landry is the obvious choice - and that will see two Queenslanders moved up, as well as Littleproud as leader. But Susan McDonald - another Queenslander - is an emerging talent in the Senate. Keep an eye on her. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.48pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack on whether he expects Barnaby Joyce to challenge again: 
No, I don't expect him to. I've been endorsed as leader. I was endorsed as leader when we came back here after the May election last year I was endorsed as leader when he stood down in 2018. That's three times in less than two years. I think that is enough to warrant me leading the party going forward.
But there are plenty of people in the Nationals who are swearing that Michael McCormack won't survive as leader for much longer - they are all in the Barnaby camp, obviously - but still. It's not going to be fun for him.
Maybe he'll finally develop a personality in all of this. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.46pm GMT 
Over in the Greens, Adam Bandt is the only person who has nominated for leader. 
 Paul Karp is outside the room - he is hearing that there may be a leader in the Senate who will be deputy leader. Discussions are still being held on whether there is a second deputy leader. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.45pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack is pissed: 
I'd like to thank the entire National party team, and I know they will now unite. 
We had way too much media speculation, way too much speculation in general, about the leadership role. 
It's time to put all that to bed. I would also say to the media - sometimes, I think, that there's been media speculation heightened only by stories that were, quite frankly, untrue, quite frankly, backgrounding, if they're not prepared to put their name to it, I don't understand why it actually makes the paper. 
If people are going to be - I've been upfront - if ever I said anything to to a journalist, I asked them to put my name to it. That's the way I am and that's the way I think we need to go forward. We need to unite, we will unite. 
The people of regional Australia come first, not us. We're sent here to do the job and we will do that.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.44pm GMT 
Basically - you can put your bread away. Michael McCormack  stays. 
It doesn't look like it was an overwhelming win, though. 
Ten to 11 is what I have been told - but that is probably based on their estimates. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.43pm GMT 
 David Littleproud: 
This is a proud day for me. I joined this great party 22 years ago, in my electorate, the little town of Stanthorpe. 
I believe very much in the values of the National party. This is about hope, this is about vision for our people in regional and rural Australia. This is about now back to business. 
The shenanigans are over, it's time to get back to looking after those people that are facing drought, that have faced up to the fires. It's time for us to focus on them, not us. 
The party has to focus on that. 
We will, we have a commitment from everyone in the room, that we have a responsibility as being elected from regional and rural Australia, to stand here to be their hope in Canberra, to be able to articulate clearly their needs and wants and their desires because regional and rural Australia has a great future. 
The story of regional and rural Australia and particularly of agriculture is just to have rain. It will rain. 
We shouldn't talk ourselves down. There's been too much of that. 
We're doing it tough, yes, in some parts but we will through and it's important we have a policy framework to support our future and those that we have lost over many generations. We've lost too many young people out of regional and rural Australia, it's time to bring them home, time for them to believe in regional Australia and the National party is the party to lead them.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.41pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack: 
It's a great honour and a privilege to continue to serve as the leader of the National party. 
I congratulate David Littleproud for his election to the deputy leader's position. Also, I look forward to working and continuing to work with Barnaby Joyce, who put his hand up for the leadership. I also continue to look forward to working with Keith Pitt and David Gillespie, who put their hands up for the deputy leader's role. 
Never before has there been such an important time for the National party to continue the representation we've done for 100 years. 
It's the challenge that is there. Of course, with the fires, with the ongoing drought. I commend David Littleproud as the newly elected deputy leader for the role he played this very worrying and troubling summer in drought, in bushfires and everything else that has beset regional Australia. 
We will continue as a united team, to put the people of regional Australia first and foremost. 
I want to thank my colleagues for again placing their faith in me. I also want to acknowledge that regional Australians are out there hurting. They are and we will be there for them. Their interests are our interests. 
First and foremost, I have never shied from the responsibility of making sure that every waking minute of every day I work hard for regional Australians, as does David, as does the entire National party team. 
We will continue to serve in a very good government. We have been very responsive to the needs and wants and expectations this summer and particularly for regional Australia.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.39pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack has won the vote - Damian Drum (the chief whip) says we will "never find out" what the numbers were. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.38pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack wins leadership spill  
 Michael McCormack and David Littleproud are the new leadership team.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.38pm GMT 
If Barnaby Joyce doesn't win this though, then Matt Canavan also loses.
The word from Queensland is Canavan is looking at a lower house move - Ken O'Dowd's  Flynn seat has been floated as the most likely - which would be part of a long-term plan to win the leadership himself and become deputy prime minister.
Nothing concrete yet but the chats are being had. 
But Canavan will be on the backbench after this if Joyce loses. Which leaves him free to talk as much as he wants.
It might be a win for Keith Pitt though - he is in line to move into the ministry, with Canavan out. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.35pm GMT 
But let's just remember that this is a leadership spill with 21 people, and none of us actually know what the numbers are until they are counted.
Although I hear Peter Dutton  has the numbers in the Nationals party room. 
block-time published-time 10.34pm GMT 
The ballot has been taken from the Nationals party room - looks like the deputy leadership vote is being held. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.33pm GMT 
The problem is, if Michael McCormack just flops across the line, with 13 votes, and the disgruntled Nationals continue to rumble - which they will - then it only takes a couple of people to change their mind.
That's a little tougher in a smaller party room: there are only 21 Nationals and moving one chess piece usually moves sacrificing another, so the moves are a little more difficult.
But.
If the government continues to struggle to gain traction - and the budget isn't going to help, with the prime minister and the treasurer already moving to lower expectations of a surplus (which never really existed, because, come on - you are relying on iron ore prices and other outside factors which have nothing to do with government policy and everything to do with world exports) it is only going to get worse. 
So we'll have a bunch of agitators with a grudge and a leader who has shown he doesn't know how to respond.
Fun times. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.28pm GMT 
 Barnaby Joyce resigned as deputy prime minister on 26 February 2018.
That was just 708 days ago. Or 23 months and nine days. 
He doesn't look to have the numbers at the moment. He looks like falling short. But the act of the spill is enough to unsettle the party - it won't be over.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.21pm GMT 
The Greens are also holding their party room meeting now.
 Adam Bandt  will be the leader.
But there are three people for two deputy spots - Larissa Waters, Sarah Hanson-Young  and Mehreen Faruqi.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.18pm GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie walked into the room with the NT senator Sam McMahon  and the NSW senator  Perin Davey (who Jim Molan tried to beat with a below-the-line campaign after he lost the Senate preselection. He returned after Arthur Sinodinos left for the US.) 
That's important. Because if you don't think that this Nationals spill isn't the direct result of McKenzie being forced to resign over #sportsrorts, then you are not paying attention.
The view within half the Nationals is that McKenzie was forced to be the scapegoat for doing what she was directed to do and Michael McCormack didn't save her. 
How better to get back at Scott Morrison  then to deliver him Barnaby Joyce  as his deputy?
Up until late last week, the Nationals were convinced McKenzie would survive. And then she didn't. Given that none of us will ever see the PM&C report (it has been made cabinet in confidence) into the affair, it would have been pretty easy to find that McKenzie didn't breach ministerial standards (which is what she went down for).
But it didn't. And less than 24 hours later - we have a leadership spill. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.11pm GMT 
enltrCongratulations to Richard for his wonderful leadership. I spent yesterday talking to my colleagues. I'm supporting Adam for leader and will be standing for co-deputy leader. I think Adam, Larissa & I would make a great team. The fight for the planet has never been more pressing
- Sarah Hanson-Young?? (@sarahinthesen8) February 3, 2020
block-time published-time 10.11pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack  has made his address to MPs - Barnaby Joyce  was out of the room.
Joyce is back in there now and making his address. McCormack left.
(This is normal - it's easier to talk about how terrible your opponent is when your opponent isn't in the room.)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.09pm GMT 
I have just been reminded (thank you) that Jim Molan, who admitted on Q&A last night that he wasn't relying on evidence for his climate scepticism views, was also the director of the National Aerial Firefighting Centre for three years.
Probably not great to have someone who admits to not relying on evidence to form his climate views, making judgments on what waterbombing forces we need to fight fires.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.06pm GMT 
 Mike Bowers  caught #thoughtsandprayers in action.
    Scott and Jenny Morrison, Michael and Catherine McCormack, and Josh Frydenberg at an ecumenical service to mark the start of the 2020 parliamentary year at St Andrew's Presbyterian church in Canberra. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Scott Morrison arrives and greets Michael McCormack. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.14pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.02pm GMT 
 Sarah Martin says when asked if he had the numbers, Michael McCormack replied: "All good."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.00pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack and Barnaby Joyce enter party room  
 Sarah Martin tells me he was flanked by Andrew Gee,  Michelle Landry and Mark Coulton. 
 Barnaby Joyce,  much like the cheese, walks in alone. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.59pm GMT 
See?
 Mehreen Faruqi  had wanted co-leaders.
 Larissa Waters will also want to stay on as deputy - there is already a co-deputy system in place in the Greens, so this doesn't change much. 
enltrMehreen Farouqi has resolved to nominate for deputy leader of the Greens @AmyRemeikis           @Paul_Karp           #auspol
 - Katharine Murphy (@murpharoo) February 3, 2020
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.56pm GMT 
Oh, and the Greens are holding its leadership vote today.
 Adam Bandt  will win that one. It is, as they say, done. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.56pm GMT 
 Anthony Albanese  spoke just ahead of this morning's church service: 
Look, this is a day which parliament has set aside to deal with a condolence motion for the bushfires, the terrible impact, the loss of life, the loss of property. And what we have here is the most self-indulgent act of the National party. The Coalition's problem for this government is that they're too focused on themselves rather than on the Australian people. And today is the ultimate self-indulgence that just reinforces that. This government needs to actually concentrate on what the Australian people need rather than on itself. It's all about politics.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.59pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.54pm GMT 
One of Michael McCormack's  problems is highlighted right here - Queensland is supposed to be National party heartland. 
enltrImagine being leader of a political party yet still being so unmemorable that even the @couriermail doesn't realise that's            @BOConnorMP not Michael McCormack            pic.twitter.com/ZJn77BAFI3
 - Dee Madigan (@deemadigan) February 3, 2020
Even in a country where "male, pale and stale" tends to be the rule for politics, McCormack fades into the walls. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.51pm GMT 
The Nationals are walking in to their party room meeting.
We expect a statement at 9.45am to say the spill has been called. We should have a result around 10.30am.
At this stage, the numbers still seem locked at about 9/10 each.
There are claims Barnaby has 12 - one more than is needed in a 21-strong party room - but people lie. 
But it doesn't matter for Michael McCormack, unless he wins conclusively - which is very, very unlikely. A split party room shown to be split doesn't tend to hold on for long. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.05pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.49pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison finished with this: 
Those matters [the Nationals] will be sorted out properly this morning and the attention of the nation will be on the condolence motion. And the parliament has been reserved for the full day today to give total focus on that. That's the focus of the day. That's my focus.
And he also gave special mention to the Abdallah family, who lost three of their four children in the horrific and tragic Oatlands crash at the weekend.
But again to the Abdallah family, my thoughts and prayers. My heartfelt, sincere condolences are to them. We love you and you have a God who loves you, you know beyond the measure. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.44pm GMT 
Asked if he could work with Barnaby Joyce as his deputy, Scott Morrison  says: 
The Coalition is between the Liberals and the Nationals. And that Coalition has always provided very stable and very good government for this country. And, in fact, that Coalition government has been the majority form of government for most of our time since certainly the Liberal party was formed. And that Coalition is always strong.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.43pm GMT 
 Scott Morrison  spoke outside the church service, which is held before the first parliamentary sitting, about what the day is supposed to be about: 
Today for the parliament is very much a focus on the reflecting on the terrible losses over the summer, to reflect on the lessons of the summer, and to say very clearly that Australians are not overcome, Australians are not overwhelmed, and Australians are strong, and the government will be there with them each step of the way as they rebuild, and they rebuild back better. 
And Australia will go forward in what has been a very difficult start to the year with the strength and character that it's well known for. And the government will do the same.
He was then asked about the Nationals - which is what today is actually about, because they decided that's what today should actually be about - and Morrison had this to say when asked if the Nationals were a distraction:
Not to me. I'm focused very much on the important business we have to do today in this parliament, and to honour those who have given so much for their country and, in many cases, have lost everything.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.07pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.29pm GMT 
Reminded by Laura Jayes  that his problems in the past have arisen from things he had not declared (his relationship and citizen status are just a couple which come to my mind), Barnaby Joyce is asked if there is anything, anything at all, he hasn't previously declared and might need to.
He says, conclusively, there is nothing he needs to declare.
Asked if he will survive the coming auditor general's report into water buybacks, Joyce says he will. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.22pm GMT 
 Barnaby Joyce is being pushed very hard by Laura Jayes on Sky News about what is his actual plan to lower power prices and get investment back in regional towns (among other things) - and what he is promising that Michael McCormack has not.
The short answer is: there is no concrete plan. There are a lot of motherhood statements and a lot of callbacks to what he did when he was last in charge of the Nationals - which was a time when the economy was looking a hell of a lot better than it is now.
"Laura, Laura, Laura you are talking to a backbencher - how about we have this discussion after the ballot?" Joyce says. 
"Who wants to be a leader, who wants to be deputy prime minister," Jayes says.
"I will stand by my record, Laura, on what we have achieved in the past."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.17pm GMT 
Asked on ABC Breakfast about the rural women who have urged the Nationals not to reinstall Barnaby Joyce  as leader ( as reported by Sarah Martin on Monday ) Joyce had this to say:
Well, it's all the case, isn't it, that you just have to deal with it. Politics is a game where if people can't beat you on policy, they're going to try to beat you personally. And they'll be organised by others to roll on out. That is the unfortunate art form of some in politics, and they've had to deal with it before, and I'm sure we'll see it again. On the policy issues, I'm happy to have that discussion.
You can read Martin's full story here:
 Related:  Rural women warn Nationals not to restore Barnaby Joyce to leadership
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.14pm GMT 
#thoughtsandprayers
enltr"I think it's time to go in and say a few prayers" - Deputy Prime Minister @M_McCormackMP arrives at church ahead of this morning's Nationals leadership spill            #auspol           @SBSNews           pic.twitter.com/fgNMAepy2y
 - Brett Mason (@BrettMasonNews) February 3, 2020
enltr"I think it's time to go in and say a few prayers" - Deputy Prime Minister @M_McCormackMP arrives at church ahead of this morning's Nationals leadership spill            #auspol           @SBSNews           pic.twitter.com/fgNMAepy2y
 - Brett Mason (@BrettMasonNews) February 3, 2020
That'll fix it
block-time published-time 9.12pm GMT 
 Darren Chester  appeared on Sky News a little earlier this morning, and the ABC just a few moments ago.
Props to Chester for continuing to front up to all the cameras. A lot of Nationals have gone dark after agitating to create this situation.
Chester, who is firmly in Michael McCormack's camp (and is no fan of Barnaby Joyce, a feeling which is very mutual), told the ABC he was "embarrassed" by the leadership spill and apologised for it. 
Well, I believe Michael McCormack has the numbers, and I've gotta say I'm frustrated, I'm disappointed, I'm somewhat embarrassed that we're going through this today. I mean, I want to offer an apology to the Australian people. 
I know a lot of regional Australians watch your program. Those people who are suffering the consequences of drought or bushfires, on a day when the parliament was due, and is due, to debate a condolence motion, to have us talking about ourselves is embarrassing. I apologise for that. 
I want to reassure them there are a lot of people here in Canberra who are fighting to make sure the recovery goes as quickly and as well as it possibly can.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.08pm GMT 
 Liberal senator not relying on evidence for climate scepticism views  
Meanwhile, the first episode of Q&A with Hamish Macdonald at the helm gave bushfire victims (the ones we are supposed to be focused on in parliament today, until the Nationals made it all about themselves - and they accuse the media of living in a "Canberra bubble") a chance to speak to politicians and experts about what Australia is facing moving forward.
The Liberal senator Jim Molan, who moved heaven and earth to get back into the parliament for one last three-year go-around, and who was supported by a group of Liberals who were willing to blow the whole show up if necessary to get him back in, admitted he doesn't believe the science is settled on climate change.
And then, when pressed on what evidence he was relying on to form his views by Macdonald, Molan went further. 
I'm not relying on evidence, Hamish.
At least he was honest.
But the climate will keep changing if we don't do something, no matter how many feelpinions Senator Jim Molan has. (It's also a very disconcerting admission from a man who was a general in our armed forces.)
 Related:  'I'm not relying on evidence' for climate change: Jim Molan angers audience in new-look Q&A
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.01pm GMT 
 Good morning  
Well, we enter the first day of parliament - which was supposed to be all about the summer bushfire emergency and its victims - talking about the Nationals, because they decided to hold a leadership spill today.
The leaders and a lot of the MPs of the moment are at church this morning for the traditional opening of parliament service, which means there is a lot of Old Testament floating around.
 Michael McCormack  opened with: "There is a time to tear down and a time to build. Now is a time to build," as he fights to keep his job. 
There are only a couple of votes in this at the moment. Even if McCormack holds on by one or two, the vote will show just how divided the party is. And that, as we know, is not sustainable long term.
 Barnaby Joyce  on the other hand, says he has spent the past two years in backbench purgatory learning from his mistakes - and he now has the "personal infrastructure" in place to succeed. He told the ABC:
I've [been in a] steady relationship, I've got two boys here. The infrastructure, the personal infrastructure around me  is such that I believe I'm in a better position to go forward.
And what I'll be focusing on is to make sure that the National party, as a team, has the best candidates in the key positions, and to make sure that we have the best capacity to deliver a policy outcome, because that is what our people require.
Joyce has also pointed out that he has "been in politics longer than Scott Morrison " and he has been in "leadership longer than Scott Morrison".
So this is great for the Liberals too. They must be absolutely loving this.
Just as much as they must have loved Matt Canavan going on Sky News and telling Andrew Bolt last night that there haven't been enough people standing up for coal in the government. 
So, as we wait for the Nationals to head into their party room meeting at nine, the numbers are looking very tight. Both McCormack and Joyce's camps are claiming they have about nine or 10 votes locked in. People lie, obviously, and as  Darren Chester told Laura Jayes on Sky this morning, the only people you can believe are the ones who tell you they would never vote for you. Still, that seems about right from the phone calls we have all been making. Which means it will take just two of the newbies to decide this.
We'll bring you everything as it happens. 
 Mike Bowers is already out and about and filing. I'll bring you some of that very soon. You also have Katharine Murphy,  Sarah Martin  and  Paul Karp  and a three-coffee Amy.
Ready?
Let's get into it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.18pm GMT

Load-Date: February 4, 2020


End of Document




Droughts, flood, feed: farmer satellites see all but what about climate change?; New Digital Earth Australia technology will help farmers monitor the landscape - but is the government ignoring its ability to analyse climate change?
The Guardian(London)
June 2, 2017 Friday 1:43 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS; Version:1
Length: 949 words
Byline: Max Opray
Body


From checking water levels in far-flung dams to making sure the sheep aren't wrecking the paddock, Australian farmers sometimes find themselves needing to be everywhere at once - and, thanks to the latest satellite analysis capabilities, soon they could be.
In May, the Turnbull government allocated  $15.3m over two years to deliver Digital Earth Australia, a free open-access set of products (a beta model is currently accessible ) that account for complex variations in the atmosphere, sun position and view angle to deliver precise, continually updated imagery into the hands of the public.
Developed by Geoscience Australia in coordination with the CSIRO and the National Computational Infrastructure, the project will for the first time provide open access to three decades of historical satellite data captured every two weeks at 25-metre squared resolution, with future images to provide detail down to every 10 square metres of Australia updated every five days. 
The project will offer datasets including the normalised difference vegetation index and fractional cover to help paint a picture of changes to vegetation, an intertidal extents model that provides a picture of changes to tidal patterns and coastlines, and water observations from space that monitor rivers, lakes, dams and flooding.
 Related:  Extreme weather is hurting Australian farmers - it's time to demand action
Geoscience Australia's environmental geoscience division chief, Dr Stuart Minchin, says that, along with the mining sector and environmental studies, agriculture would particularly benefit from world-leading landscape monitoring capabilities, citing the popularity of the technology in an Australia-wide trial. 
By the conclusion of the NRM Spatial Hub study last year, farmers on 300 properties covering an area of more than 50 million hectares were using satellite data to analyse the vegetation condition of their properties to see where feed was available and not being used, and move water points accordingly to encourage livestock to migrate to those areas.
A survey of those involved found 95% of users thought the technology had the potential to measurably improve the productivity and sustainability of their property.
"Over 70% of the graziers involved in the trial said they believed the technology would increase their sustainable carry capacity, and it can now be rolled out to every grazier in the country," Minchin says.
He also notes that the technology is also able to monitor how quickly crops are drying out, allowing farmers to adjust schedules for water and fertiliser application across large areas accordingly. 
Minchin adds that flood risk could be counteracted by providing farmers with information about which specific paddocks or buildings are likely to become inundated based on weather forecasts combined with analysis of past flood levels. 
He says insurance companies are also interested in using satellite-based indexes on drought to provide insurance to farms, so if they get to certain levels of dryness they get a payout regardless of whether government declares drought.
 Dr Graeme Kernich, the deputy chief executive of the part government funded CRCSI research group, says his organisation was involved in some of the early phases of development of the project and is pleased with how it has developed.
"We are road-mapping it now and intend to serve as a conduit for local industry, helping them identify low-hanging fruit which can be addressed by this technology," he says.
In developing a continually evolving picture of countrywide vegetation cover, water supplies, coastal erosion and the impacts of flood and drought, the technology also has significant potential to analyse the biggest threat to Australian farmers - climate change, which is already reducing farm productivity and potential wheat yields.
 Related:  Agbots, next gen farming and how they can teach us about the future of work
Australian National University paleoclimate scientist Andrew Glikson says the federal government generally "did not want to accept the reality of climate science" but that the Digital Earth Australia product line it is funding should in any case "greatly improve detailed real-time monitoring of Australia's landscape conditions, water resources, pasture and natural vegetation environments, as a function of changing climate conditions, with major contributions to research by government authorities, CSIRO, BOM, universities and the agricultural and mining sectors".
Despite its potential, the capability to contribute to climate change research is not mentioned in the original project funding announcement by the resources minister, Matthew Canavan, nor in a Geoscience Australia site explaining the benefits of the project.
Canavan, who last year expressed "uncertainty" about climate change, told the Guardian in a statement that his announcement "provided examples of some of the practical uses of Digital Earth Australia, not a list of its limitations" and that he expects the technology "will have a wide range of applications, including information about climate change".
For Geoscience Australia's part, Minchin says the project has applicability in areas such as the monitoring of carbon farming initiatives but that climate change is not a "core focus" of the project, which he says focuses more on ways to help business productivity. 
The University of Melbourne director of Centre for Spatial Data Infrastructures and Land Administration, Prof Abbas Rajabifard, says the applicability of the project to climate change depends in the end on "the authorities setting up the standardised protocols and specification for the development of analytical tools and applications".

Load-Date: June 2, 2017


End of Document




The threat to species from climate change should provoke shame in our hearts; The flora and fauna that have made Australia such a remarkable place is under grave threat from a climate changing due to carbon emissions
The Guardian
January 19, 2017 Thursday 9:24 PM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION
Length: 743 words
Byline: Tim Flannery
Body


While Australia bakes through another hot, angry summer, its precious wildlife is increasingly under threat, not just from the extreme weather of fires and floods but by the growing reality of a changing climate.
It is getting hotter. Day by day, month by month, year by year - 2016 is confirmed as the hottest year on record globally, closely following the leads of 2015 and 2014 - and with summer in full swing in Australia we turn our minds and our national concerns to bushfires, ever more intense, and to extreme weather events, flash flooding, cyclonic winds, unexpected parching and flooding of our wide brown land.
And it is not just the Australian people who are feeling these stresses first hand, but some of the most unique wildlife to be found anywhere in the world.
 Related:  2016 hottest year ever recorded - and scientists say human activity to blame
For those who have had the privilege of watching a platypus swim, of holding a koala, of watching kangaroos bound across seemingly endless plateaus - you should be well aware that these special creatures face a very uncertain future. Climate change from unprecedented carbon emissions not only threaten the habitats of our unique animals and birds, but also challenges the very ability of them to survive. 
This should be of concern to each and every one of us. Species lost, iconic animals threatened, wiped out, perhaps in a generation. This should provoke nothing short of shame in the hearts of people the world over.
So what we can be sure about?
Climate change is making Australia hotter. Hot days are happening more often while heatwaves are becoming hotter, longer and more frequent.
While it has been clear for many years that climate change is a major factor in intensifying heat, recent scientific advances now allow us to understand the extent of the impact on individual extreme events.
Climate change has significantly worsened recent extreme heat events in Australia. And the outlook just looks bleaker.
The work of some great scientists from this side of the planet emphasises the very real threat to our unique wildlife. In addition, the most recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) stated that native species are set to "suffer from range contractions, and some may face local or even global extinction ... Koalas, gliders, quokkas, platypus and several species of birds and fish will all suffer from shrinking habitats as temperatures increase, even under the most optimistic scenarios."
And it is not just our well known natural icons, it is the lesser known also. The golden-shouldered parrot, currently listed as endangered in Queensland, is only found in the southern and central Cape York Peninsula, and is now restricted to just two populations there - covering an area less than 2,000 sq km.
 This rare and beautiful bird will be one of many species that will likely be affected by increased temperatures, fires and droughts across Northern Australia.
Then there is the little known Lumholtz's tree kangaroo, a remarkable animal.
According to the Australian Wildlife Conservancy, global warming poses a very real threat to this species. They thrive in a high-altitude, cool rainforest as these areas provide the kangaroo with a cool environment, keeping their body temperatures down with access to moisture from dew and mist formed under the rainforest canopy. There can be little doubt that increased atmospheric temperatures will significantly impact these habitats.
Everywhere we turn we can see that our changing climate, and the extreme weather it delivers with a vengeance, is already having a profound and deeply disturbing impact on the flora and fauna that have made the Great Southern Land such a remarkable place - for travellers, for explorers, for discovery.
 Related:  Koalas are at the centre of a perfect storm. The species is slipping away | Kevin Evans
It is a sad fact that the very country that risks losing these special places, these special and unique forms of life, is also playing such a key role in warming the planet. Our export coal industry is being pushed to expand and expand, despite all the economics and science one can throw at our leaders.
So while other countries are winding down their coal use, Australia is attempting to ramp up our production and export of the product, all the while as we watch first-hand the immediate and long term damage coal and fossil fuels are wreaking on our planet, on people and on nature.

Load-Date: January 19, 2017


End of Document




They elected Trump; now conservatives own climate change; Anyone who voted for Trump shares the responsibility for the climate damages resulting from his presidency
The Guardian
November 10, 2016 Thursday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 570 words
Byline: John Abraham
Body


Many of us in the United States are in deep shock and despair. The election of Donald Trump speaks of a country and a world that represents so many things that go against our deepest grains. However, as I told my children this morning, the Earth will still turn, the sun will still rise. In fact, a Trump presidency will not have the dire consequences that many of us fear - especially for people like me who will be insulated from his policies. Surely it will change the economics and courts in the US, among other things. But really, all of these are transient.
The one thing that isn't transient is the impact this will have on climate change. It is now virtually certain the world will not meet any of its climate targets. If Trump (and the Republican-controlled Congress) stand by their pledges, we will see a major rollback of the tremendous progress that has been made on reducing emissions. A Trump presidency will likely set us back at least a decade, perhaps longer. And that is a decade we can't afford.
The world will blow past the 2°C (3.6°F) target set in Paris. This means it will be difficult to avoid the worst consequences of climate change. 
The election also affects how we should talk about climate change. In the US, and in many other countries, opposing steps to cut carbon pollution has become a litmus test for conservative politicians. So, in this sense, conservatives now own climate change. I can just imagine the slogans, "Climate change, brought to you by your neighborhood conservatives."
George W. Bush was the worst president ever on climate change. Back then, with the reality of climate change not as widely known, it is conceivable to give voters a pass. But not now. Anyone who voted for Trump shares the responsibility for what is now inevitable. 
It's really too bad because many conservatives certainly don't want to destroy the Earth's climate. Furthermore, there are some conservatives who do take climate change seriously. However, when a central belief to conservatism results in decades of inaction, it makes it impossible to avoid staring facts in the face.
Conservatives own climate change.
Conservatives own the consequences of climate change.
They own the increased droughts, more severe storms, sea level rise, and floods.
They own the heat waves, the loss of habitat and the shifting climate zones.
They own the climate refugees, the resulting political strive, and climate conflicts. 
They own it all.
Liberals, both in the United States and around the world, have tried to work with conservatives to devise practical plans that will reduce the threats of climate change. In the past few years there was real progress. 
We had hope.
Now, we can look forward to the United States going backwards. Becoming the world's laggard on climate change (again). Once again, America's leaders will describe climate change as a hoax or as a non-threat. 
So, I'd like to rename climate change to "Climate Change, brought to you by Conservatives". I will spend the next four years reminding people that the climate change we are seeing, and the climate change which is now unavoidable could have been stopped. I will count up the economic and social consequences of climate change which could have been stopped. These are now the liability of conservatives. The financial costs of adapting will also be owned by conservatives.
They asked for it, they got it. Our job is to never let them forget it.

Load-Date: November 10, 2016


End of Document




Should business leaders speak out more on climate change?; Catch up on all the highlights from our live debate on the role of business in vocalising the environmental agenda - see the panel guests
The Guardian
August 7, 2015 Friday 4:56 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 5516 words
Byline: Tom Levitt
Body


block-time published-time 2.46pm BST 
Thank you to our all our panel guests (see full list). As a final comment, I'd like to highlight a couple of interesting points from Andy Rowell and Eliot Whittington.
Andy Rowell says: Can business leaders be expected to commit to legitimate, realistic pledges or could pledges turn into a publicity campaign in getting a positive reputation in an increasingly aware community of consumers?I am afraid the oil industry has a history of greenwashing on pledges to tackle climate change - BP's pledge and multi-million campaign to go "beyond Petroleum" just after the Millenium being the most obvious one. Fifteen years later, the company is more dependent on oil and gas than ever.. So I think you have to be very careful of spin..
And in response, Eliot Whittington says: While that's true, I think you're missing out part of the picture. Under one CEO (Lord Browne) BP did have a commitment to renewables and make some investments - they then dismantled that when the leadership changed. You can critique the pledge, but I think it's important to recognise there was a change in strategy away from it.
A nod to the importance of business leadership then...
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.10pm BST
block-time published-time 2.39pm BST 
 What advice would you give business leaders?  
 Now for some closing comments from our panel guests. What advice would they give business leaders? 
Edward Cameron: I would tell them the world is changing. Climate change is already impacting their supply chains, operations, workers, and markets and if they fail to act they will exacerbate their risk. I would tell them that we have an unprecedented opportunity to create a better economy and that governments and other businesses are rising to the challenge. I would tell them that they cannot stand apart from this movement towards a new climate economy without running the risk of damage to their brand and ceding growth opportunities to others who are more innovative. but most importantly I would listen to them. Understand their business. Try to design a strategy tailored for them. And stop preaching.... as I do that far too much already.
Clare Hieron:  I would say: be brave but be honest - pledges are fine but the long term viability of your business relies on your ability to deliver on a low carbon business plan so don't be tempted by green-wash!
Andrew Crane:  Business likes a level playing field, so it is imperative that business leaders are united in calling for tough, international climate change rules that affect everyone.
Ben Kellard:  Clarify your strategic, longer term material issues (and how you can contribute to a sustainable future) and develop bold goals around them. Then distinguish between what you can act on directly and what you can do (creatively) to influence and shape the wider market/system to create a more sustainable future.
Andy Rowell: The climate science is telling us that the time to act is now, not tomorrow. Fine words and pledges are no longer enough.. its time for radical action.
Eliot Whittington: If I was speaking to a business leader now I'd steal Edward & Veronica's refrain that this change is inevitable and you are either with it or against it, but I'd also add that if you don't play a visible constructive role in making the change happen - working to bring about a new, low-carbon, low-climate risk, sustainable economy, then sooner or later you will find that despite your best efforts policies to support the change will be introduced and you will have missed your chance to shape them and develop them to be efficient, cost effective and effective in helping you change as quickly as possible. You won't make this agenda go away but instead you will just store up problems for the future.
Veronica Lie: ...Remind them that the most important ingredient in engagement is actually not speaking but listening: 'We have two ears and one mouth so that we can listen twice as much as we speak.'
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.43pm BST
block-time published-time 2.21pm BST 
And another answer in response to the carbon tax question ( see 13:55 )
Andrew Crane: If even oil sands companies are asking for a higher price for carbon, you know it has reached a pretty major threshold of acceptability:http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2015/05/22/boss-of-biggest-oilsands-_n_7423096.html
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39pm BST
block-time published-time 2.19pm BST 
Another response to Heather Kilgour's external costs question ( See: 13:55 ) and specifically on the issue of a carbon tax.
Edward Cameron says: I would say the two things I hear most often from business on this issue is that they would like to have policy certainty and a price on carbon. So personally, I believe it is both a powerful incentive to climate ambition but also one that could get support politically and from the business community. If set up correctly it could also help us to address regressive taxes elsewhere in the system. We would likely need to be agnostic about the method as one jurisdiction might be more disposed towards emissions trading and another might lean towards a tax. We would also have to do a far better job of setting them up than has been the experience to date (i.e. lets not give permits away for free when government revenue can grow by selling them!!!) but overall I think the future lies in carbon pricing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41pm BST
block-time published-time 2.15pm BST 
 Is the system at fault, rather than business?  
Julian Spindler has asked: How can business leaders promote climate change solutions when their businesses are based on a free market "growth"model, the very antithesis of what is needed? Fundamentally, climate change is the result of massive, unsustainable over consumption. 
In response...
Ben Kellard says: That's right that our current consumer model of 'take- make- waste' based on (relatively) cheap oil has fuelled CC, however it raises the question over what kind of 'growth' we need. We are expecting another 2bn people by 2050 and we aren't able to currently meet the needs of 7bn with our current resources, so I think we need a step change in our political economy that incentivises and delivers solutions that are low carbon and resource efficient products and services that meet real human needs.
Eliot Whittington says: We absolutely do need a fundamental rewiring of the economy if we are to tackle climate change and other sustainability challenges. And I think there are business leaders who get that - they know that their business and the economy they operate in looks fundamentally different in the future. What I think they, and the rest of us, are feeling towards is how do we get there? Ideas like that about the circular economy are starting to answer this, but there's a way to go.
 Related: The end of capitalism has begun
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm BST
block-time published-time 2.12pm BST 
In response to Veronica Lie's answer to whether business leaders should speak out or not ( see 14:03 ), Andrew Crane says: I think you are right Veronica, but two things stand out for me: 1. Your comment in parenthesis that it depends if leaders are on the right side of the argument. This is really important but often with public issues there is no clear right side, except of perhaps whether the majority of their stakeholders agree. Climate change is a little different because there is such a huge scientific consensus, but that is not the case for lots of other issues that business leaders have spoken out on, such as same-sex marriage, immigration, health care and others. 2. The risks you mention (e.g. bad publicity) tend to be short term, while the rewards (e.g. addressing climate change) are often more long term. So business leaders often value the risks higher, even if the rewards are, in principle, much greater.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 2.05pm BST 
Andy Rowell draws attention to Edward Cameron's point about fossil fuel subsidies.
We are talking about billions and billions of consumer and production subsidies. As Damian Carrington pointed out yesterday in the Guardian, according to the IMF: "Subsidies for fossil fuels amount to $1,000 (£640) a year for every citizen living in the G20 group of the world's leading economies, despite the group's pledge in 2009 to phase out support for coal, oil and gas."
It goes without saying that this is total economic and ecological madness which Governments seem incapable of fixing, despite numerous pledges to the contrary..
 Related: G20 countries pay over $1,000 per citizen in fossil fuel subsidies, says IMF
block-time published-time 2.04pm BST 
And one more response ( see 14:03 below ) from Gabrielle Walker... Yes indeed, spot on Veronica and Edward. As Richard Sandor (founder of the Chicago Climate Exchange) memorably put it: "If you're not at the table, you're on the menu!"
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56pm BST
block-time published-time 2.03pm BST 
 Should business leaders speak out or not?  
 Should business leaders speak out or not? 
Veronica Lie: It's risky, I think, for business leaders to stay silent and inactive on issues that matter to their stakeholders. The silent will not escape judgment; they'll be dismissed as irrelevant.
Ben Kellard: I agree and I think we have reached the point where the risks of businesses staying silent are greater than speaking out.
Edward Cameron: We often use the old adage that "you can lead the parade or get run over by it". A new low-GHG economy is being created all around us. This summer alone more than 40 countries have come forward with climate action plans representing almost 60% of global emissions. In addition we have seen more than 140 companies with a combined market value of in excess of $2tn commit to climate action through the We Mean Business Campaign. They are all helping to create a new economy. The resilient business of the future will seize this as an opportunity and help shape it. The businesses who fail to act will be left behind.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.53pm BST
block-time published-time 2.00pm BST 
Another response to Heather Kilgour below from Andy Rowell: Heather Kilgour asks a great question: Maybe if companies were responsible for all the externalities including pollution then this would not even be an issue?I think if companies did pay the full external cost then certainly people would not fly so much and we would radicaly rethink how and why we travel - It is cheaper to fly to Iceland and back from Bristol than get a single train to London - and that's not even a peak ticket. It makes no climate sense at all.
And if airlines and airports had to pay the full cost of their carbon dioxide emissions, their noise pollution as well as other more localised pollution, many would argue there would not be any need for a 3rd runway at Heathrow, for example..
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 1.55pm BST 
 Business must face true costs of actions  
Heather Kilgour is asks: Maybe if companies were responsible for all the externalities including pollution then this would not even be an issue? 
In response...
Ben Kellard says: The challenge is that, unless a price is costed in globally, it risks becoming marginalised (and capital may move to another region) or an exercise in wooden dollars, as opposed to something real on the balance sheet.
Edward Cameron says: Consider China for a second. China says that up to 28% of its emissions are embedded in goods that are consumed overseas. As a result it claims that the consuming countries - mostly the EU and US - should be responsible essentially for the externalities of those emissions. They manufacture the goods but someone else demands and uses them. Many companies make the same argument - either by saying their emissions are coming from their suppliers or from their consumers. So it actually becomes difficult to determine responsibility.
Elliot Whittington says: This is the logic that leads to a lot of support for mechanisms like a carbon price - which would internalise climate impacts into companies' business model. However the political reality is that we're unlikely to get very high carbon prices that could deliver the kinds of change required and the economic reality is that a single price signal is not necessarily the right, efficient policy framework to really unlock the potential of innovation. So in practice a carbon price is a necessary but not sufficient response to climate change, and I suspect that's true for other issues too.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm BST
block-time published-time 1.51pm BST 
NoMoreMrNice then asks: Given the doubts over greenwash, and the difficulties of comparing companies, how can more be done to help those really showing leadership to stand out? Without this their public statements will always be undermined by a public scepticism (whether justified or not).
In response, Clare Hierons says: I think this is where the NGO community can help by putting forward initiatives that leaders can champion and put their name to without the risk of backlash. Rather than compete with each other they can back campaigns that drive a whole agenda forward and provide consistent commentary. RE100 is mentioned in the earlier discussion - this is a straightforward commitment for companies to switch to renewable energy sources. http://there100.org /
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.52pm BST
block-time published-time 1.49pm BST 
So good points made by NoMoreMrNice:... speaking out alone is not enough; as somebody working for an organisation that shows more vocal than practical leadership, I know that often what our suppliers hear is "X want to be seen as green, so they've put out a press release - that's nice. Means nothing to us though". I'm sure many politicians hear this as well; they know that a firm saying 'we want a sustainable future' does not necessarily mean they're saying 'we'll back a party promising aggressive carbon cuts'.
Part of the problem is the difficulty over understanding how green a company is - or even what green means - without which we can't really evaluate whether their actions match the rhetoric. When even a simple product like paper can be FSC, recycled, or (in a particularly egregious example of greenwash packaging I saw 'suitable for recycling' shown against a recycling logo on green background) assessing the full impacts of a multinational is nigh on impossible.
But it's still essential; what's needed is greater focus on some of the accreditations designed to promote sustainable practice and transparency. We need to move away from 'x is a sustainable company; they have a wind turbine at their head office' to a proper narrative that engages with business responsibilities. That cannot be done, in my view, without much stronger, simpler, more transparent certification.
block-time published-time 1.48pm BST 
Andy Rowell picking up on the politics issue (13:58). In response to Dr. Neil Cutland I think it is clear that the Conservatives - having gotten rid of the Lib Dem hand-brake - are now showing their true anti-green credentials. They are clearly anti-renewables and pro-fracking, and will do a mimimum on climate, but will spin that differently in the run up to Paris. We cannot forget that many Tory backbenchers and some Ministers are climate sceptics.
Where, you ask, are the powerful business voices, criticising the Government's environmental record since May? There have been some Andy...
 Related: Green cuts risk sending UK back to the dark ages
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm BST
block-time published-time 1.43pm BST 
Follow the money says Edward Cameron in response to Andy Rowell and Ben Kellard: I think Andy makes a great point about following the money. The climate negotiations are focused on moving $100bn per year in support of climate action. But that amount of money is not enough to change the direction of the global economy - worth in excess of $90tn. So we need to persuade mainstream investors to finance the transition to a low-carbon future and that means putting in place the right incentives. This means creating new financial vehicles (i.e. green bonds) and crucially eliminating the perverse subsidies that make fossil fuels artificially competitive.
block-time published-time 1.41pm BST 
Another response to politics question ( see 13:38 ), Andrew Crane says politics  do  matter... There was a nice study published a couple of years ago demonstrating that the political beliefs of CEOs (measured by their political donations to republican or democrat parties in the US) had a significant correlation with how well their firms performed on social responsibility, irrespective of whether the CEOs spoke up. Basically firms led by democrat CEOs invested more in CSR than those led by Republicans. So political affiliations do matter: http://asq.sagepub.com/content/58/2/197
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 1.40pm BST 
In response to politics question ( see 13:38 ), Clare Heirons says: Politics and policy need to be separated - if businesses are genuinely trying to act in the right way and find themselves constrained by legislation then speaking out is helpful. The picture gets skewed when businesses lobby to lock in business models that protect short term gain at the expense of long-term global viability.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.42pm BST
block-time published-time 1.38pm BST 
In response to below ( see 13:38 ), Edward Cameron says: I think a broad array of interests prevent companies from speaking out. If you consider the United States for a moment, a company wishing to speak out on climate change faces a Congress controlled by climate skeptics. They need to work with that Congress on trade issues, intellectual property issues, corporate tax, and every other issue under the sun. Many of them are fearful of alienating potential allies on one issue by speaking publically on climate. The net affect is that many companies are working on climate behind the scenes but reluctant to be too vocal. This has got to change but its not easy. If you were to ask me right now what is the one new element that I would like to see in this debate to help us advance the climate agenda it would be a coalition of conservative Americans - from companies, the faith based community, and ideally from State-administration in red States to come out in favor of climate action. The danger right now is that this does seem to be turning into a Liberal - Conservative split and that is very damaging.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.42pm BST
block-time published-time 1.38pm BST 
Dr Neil Cutland has sent in the following question: Given that the Conservative government has scrapped, reversed or diluted at least six significant environmental policies since it took power in May, business leaders increasingly have to be the ones who lead on the agenda. But are business leaders really likely to do so, given the Government's clearly indicated direction of travel? 
block-time published-time 1.36pm BST 
Veronica Lie warns of the dangers of backlash at those business leaders speaking out: Obviously political activism can backfire (eg when Brendan Eich of Mozilla advocated against gay rights), and this can negatively affect the company.What's important here is that business leaders are on the right side of the argument, 'the right side of the future' (as Nick Butler wrote yesterday in the FT). I think the public respects business leaders who speak up when they feel that the speaker is on their side, supporting society's progress rather than preserving the status quo for personal gain.
block-time published-time 1.36pm BST 
In answer to Anna's tweet, Andrew Crane states: The question of how we monitor corporate commitments is an important one, and I think here obviously the role played by NGOs, the media and academia is critical. With declining donations for NGOs, a newspaper industry in decline and restricted funding for universities, the potential for serious investigation of these commitments is at risk, despite the rise in social media
block-time published-time 1.35pm BST 
 Business not the only ones with responsibility  
Speaking out in sympathy towards business leaders, Matthew2012 makes a fair point: "It might be the easy part but it could make a real difference politically. If you look at the statistics businesses have been lowering their GHG output far more than the residential sector. Yes, this may have been from a very dubious base but nonetheless they have been doing things. Is it enough? No. But this mainly fallls at the doorstep of government and the available energy sources available to the business. There are a large number of barriers to even aiming to bypass the government all together. Businesses need to make it very clear what they believe the government needs to do to help them lower their emissions further."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.28pm BST
block-time published-time 1.32pm BST 
enltrTo what extent can the vision of one CEO be implemented effectively across all aspects of a global supply chain? #askGSB
 - Anna Watson (@AnnaHolliday) August 5, 2015
block-time published-time 1.31pm BST 
Edward Cameron is raging against conflicting positions taken by both government and business: How many governments advance policy objectives under the heading of "climate action" but then contradict their stated objective under for example "agricultural policy". Unfortunately the EU is a prime example of this with the CAP. Or how many development agencies sign up to climate action only to fund coal projects. I think we need to take a holistic approach to this problem and eliminate inconsistencies - or even hypocrisies - but again this is not just a problem for the business community.
block-time published-time 1.30pm BST 
In a nod of approval to the Guardian's Keep it in the Ground debate, Andy Rowell says: Everyone could do more to hold the industry to account. The City and pension funds for example still invest billions on oil and gas. Most local authorities invest too. They should be putting their money where their mouth is and disinvesting if they think these companies are acting irresponsibly.
block-time published-time 1.25pm BST 
Another response to Andy Rowell's point(see 13:15), this time from Andrew Crane : Great point Andy. And this just shows how tough it is to "discern when a business is environmentally concerned" as Anne asks. Too many companies simultaneously make major investments in sustainability with one part of their business while systematically undermining regulation through their lobbying efforts in Washington or Brussels
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.13pm BST
block-time published-time 1.25pm BST 
Edward Cameron says: Let's be clear there is a long history of everyone looking after their own interests. The diplomatic negotiations have been bogged down for more than two decades because of the exercise of national self-interest. I personally believe this is changing on all fronts. through the We Mean Business Campaign ( www.wemeanbusinesscoalition.org ) (external link) we are seeing more and more companies coming forward with very ambitious plans for GHG reductions
block-time published-time 1.24pm BST 
Eliot Whittington says: Just to pick up on the last phrase ( 13:23 ), while I think this can be evidenced, I don't think this can be proved. There are lots of guidelines out there - commitments for companies to take, projects like the Science Based Targets group or the UN guidelines for responsible lobbying. There are lots of ways that you can investigate what a company is doing and what it says, (although there's also often big transparency gaps). But in the end judgement is called for. You have to make a call on what you think is the right bar for companies to hit given their context and role.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50pm BST
block-time published-time 1.23pm BST 
In response to the question around guidelines and monitoring businesses ( see 13:20 ), Ben Kellard says: There has been a lot of good work that sets out the expectations of businesses to contribute towards sustainability trends. There are the WBCSD Action 2020, there is also http://futurefitbusiness.org / work done by the Natural Step and Bob Doppelt, all useful contributions and frameworks that organisations can use to identify their materials issues and set goals.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.51pm BST
block-time published-time 1.22pm BST 
Just before we come to everyone's answers on this second question, Clare Heirons from ShareAction has picked up on Andy Rowell's earlier point (see 13:15) : Companies need to be called up when their actions clearly don't match their rhetoric! A concerning trend here is the use of convincing-sounding arguments such as the recent adoption of carbon pricing as a solution by the oil majors. Transparency is key - leaders need to make commitments in language that anyone can understand (especially if they want to be believed!)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.12pm BST
block-time published-time 1.20pm BST 
 How do we monitor business promises?  
    Moving onto a second question.  Anne White has asked: How does one discern when a business is environmentally concerned? What guidelines would be crafted? What evidentiary proof could be established?  
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.18pm BST
block-time published-time 1.19pm BST 
And Eliot Whittington, deputy director of policy, Prince of Wales's Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change (CLG) adds his thoughts: Speaking out is not a panacea or a substitute for recognising the real impact and importance of environmental issues like climate change within their core business, but, like it or not, businesses play a key role in developing and delivering policy, and if there aren't positive voices, the negative ones will dominate.
block-time published-time 1.17pm BST 
Veronica Lie from Xynteo suggests that by having this debate we are perhaps indicating that business has become disconnected from society: I also think that the question shows how we've tended to sever business from society - it should take an interest in public issues because it is a part of society. This compartmentalisation is part of what's got us into the mess we're in now.
block-time published-time 1.15pm BST 
Investigative journalist and director at Spinwatch Andy Rowell calls for a little more action: I think business leaders not only have to speak up much more on climate, but their words need to be backed up by radical and concerted action.The next few months leading up to the crucial UN climate talks in Paris are critical. There is no substantial leadership on this issue from the big oil companies.
For example, Europe's two largest oil and gas companies Shell and BP - which recently urged action on climate change - are still basing their projections for fossil fuel use on scenarios which would see catastrophic levels of global warming. On the one hand they talk about the need for action - on the other they just carry on drilling regardless.
Shell's ill-judged attempt to drill in the Arctic is systematic of this. The company is exposing itself to huge financial and ecological risk by drilling for oil in the Arctic. It is oil we can never afford to burn if we are going to try and keep to 2 degrees warming.
block-time published-time 1.14pm BST 
Although in response, Andrew crane says: Well I think we have to be careful in saying they are stakeholders "like everyone else". No one else really has their power and influence, so they need to really engage in a way that doesn't seek to dominate or derail the debate
block-time published-time 1.13pm BST 
Edward Cameron, from BSR, says: They should speak out on issues as they are stakeholders in society like everyone else. they are exposed to climate risk like everyone else. And they are agents of change like everyone else. Many businesses have greater reach than governments. Unilever for example are present in 8/10 homes around the world every day. They can therefore use their brand, their investments and their credibility for enormous good. And does it help? It does indeed because suppliers listen to their buyers, and politicians take heed of what they hear from the private sector.
block-time published-time 1.09pm BST 
Good point from Andrew Crane, Professor of Business Ethics, Schulich School of Business too: I think that if done right, it certainly can help. When business leaders speak, people (especially governments) listen. The risk is that they tend to talk from a self-interested position, rather than one considering the broader public interest
block-time published-time 1.08pm BST 
Ben Kellard from Forum for the Future says: The business community in general aren't being anything like clear enough with governments and other stakeholders that climate change poses massive risk for businesses, especially those with agricultural supply chains. This challenges the misplaced conception that responding to climate change is bad for business. So I would like to see them being much clearer and more vocal that its in the private sector's interests for all stakeholder to tackle these issues.
block-time published-time 1.05pm BST 
 Opening question and answers  
To kick-off, I have asked the panel to give their perspective on the title question of this debate: Should business leaders speak out on public issues, such as climate change? Does it help? 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.27pm BST
block-time published-time 12.48pm BST 
This live debate will start very shortly. Thank you to all our panel guests, who are now ready and waiting to take your questions.
We've got a pile of questions ready and waiting - sent in over the past week. Il bring both these questions and any other that we get sent in as we go through the debate. 
If you want to send a question in please use the comments section below or tweet us @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB.
block-time published-time 12.38pm BST 
Another one of our panel guests Edward Cameron from BSR, has been busy giving his perspective on Obama's climate announcement.
"Whether you look at the political scene, or whether you look at the movement within the business community, I think you see an irreversible and irresistible movement toward decarbonization," Cameron concluded.
block-time published-time 10.16am BST 
Ahead of today's discussion, one of our panel guests Andrew Crane, professor of Business Ethics at Schulich School of Business has written a blogpost outlining his thoughts.
While warning business leaders against hypocrisy and making grandoise plans that cannot be delivered, he argues that aspirational talk isn't all bad...
For all the problems of greenwashing, business leaders making aspirational statements about social issues shouldn't automatically be criticized. For one thing, in the context of challenging, complex problems, it is often imperative that business leaders do go outside their comfort zones and articulate "stretch" goals that they can not necessarily know if or how they can achieve. Consider Interface Carpet's mission to reduce their waste to zero by 2020. When they started their 'mission zero' journey in 1994, former CEO Ray Anderson did not have a plan for how this would be realized only that he needed to set a vision that was inspiring enough to galvanize the entire company. Since then, Interface has cut waste to landfill by more than 90% and GHG emissions per unit of production are down almost 75%. The company is rightly lauded as a sustainability leader that others should follow. The lesson is that there is scope for business leaders to be aspirational but sooner or later they need to back up their words with sustained action.
block-time published-time 12.22pm BST 
 The panel guests  
When Richard Branson speaks out on tackling climate change does it help?
With a growing number of CEOs publicly committing their companies to taking action on climate change, what difference can their pronouncements make? Can they persuade others to follow suit, or encourage governments to legislate? 
Or is society not yet ready to believe commitments made by the business community. Branson, for example, has been criticised for failing to deliver on a $3bn climate pledge made back in 2006. 
Join the following panel on Wednesday 5 August 1-2:30pm BST to discuss the topic:
 Andy Rowell, freelance journalist and director at Spinwatch Clare Hierons, director, ShareAction Andrew Crane, Professor of Business Ethics, Schulich School of Business Edward Cameron, managing director for partnership development and research, BSR Veronica Lie, head of communications and strategy, Xynteo Ben Kellard, head of sustainable business, Forum for the Future Eliot Whittington, deputy director of policy, Prince of Wales's Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change (CLG)
You can submit your questions in the comments section at the bottom of the page, or send them to us on Twitter at @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.54pm BST

Load-Date: August 7, 2015


End of Document




Saturday Review: NON-FICTION: No credit where it's due: Three smart, combative books on climate change are already slightly out of date, laments Fred Pearce: A Blueprint for a Safer Planet by Nicholas Stern 256pp, Bodley Head, £16.99: The Politics of Climate Change by Anthony Giddens 256pp, Polity, £12.99: The Corporate Greenhouse by Yda Schreuder 256pp, Zed, £18.99
The Guardian - Final Edition
May 9, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 Guardian Newspapers Limited All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN REVIEW PAGES; Pg. 9
Length: 977 words
Byline: Fred Pearce
Body


The planet owes Nicholas Stern a big thank you. His Stern Review on climate change, written for Gordon Brown in 2006, had nothing new to say about the science of global warming, but he rewrote the story in the language of economics. Setting aside crashing ice sheets, spreading deserts and super-hurricanes, he warned instead of an economic crisis 10 times worse than the one we are experiencing now.
Presidents and prime ministers react to scientific and environmental alarums with incomprehension and a call to a junior minister. But they know that keeping the economy afloat is their job. So by changing the language, the now-ennobled Lord Stern made climate change the business of the G20 and the UN security council, not environment ministers and UN satraps.
He had another effect, liberating climate change from the suffocating embrace of science. It needs more languages: not just economic, but poetic and legal, ethical and financial. Scientists hate this, but it is essential if we are to democratise and defuse the climatic disaster awaiting us.
These three books cover the economic, political and corporate profiles of the single biggest threat to human society in the 21st century. Each author acknowledges the tragedy that it has taken so long for their worlds to take climate change seriously. A quarter century has been wasted. But at least now they are on the case.
Stern's book is a follow-up to his Review. It is partly an assault on his critics among mainstream economists, especially the "discounters", those who find it acceptable for us to simply ignore the future because their economic models say we can. He picks their case apart, accusing them of "making one mistake after another" and coming up with "totally implausible" cost estimates for climate change. This is valuable and combative stuff.
Stern also makes a compelling economic case for a global "cap and trade" system, in which permits to emit climate-warming gases are rationed, auctioned and traded. It lines up the science and the economics. So far, so good. But as Anthony Giddens in his book points out rather cruelly: "Extraordinarily, there is no mention of politics in Stern's discussion, no analysis of power. It is as if the 'global deal' will be reached as soon as the nations of the world see reason."
Giddens says that a quarter-century after the issue hit the headlines, "we have no politics of climate change". No political route map to where we need to get. No answer when politicians ask: "What's in it for me and my country?"
Read Giddens and you will despair of a deal in Copenhagen in December, the promised deadline for replacing the Kyoto Protocol. He sees resurgent nation states vetoing a global agreement on climate, as they have on trade. He sees climate-change wars. "The US is already starting to see the world through the prism of a struggle for energy resources against the backdrop of damage inflicted by climate change."
Giddens believes the solution, if there is one, lies outside the UN and its careful stratagems of "burden-sharing". Instead, he foresees a new politics built round the twin aims of energy security and combating climate change - a politics in which self-interest may combine with planetary need. He even offers Dick Cheney's "coalition of the willing" as a blueprint for future climate diplomacy.
This is far from crazy. Barack Obama's green package for economic recovery argues that the US can best secure future energy supplies by tapping Midwestern wind and desert sun, rather than Middle Eastern oil, and that it can best secure its automobile manufacturing industry with electric cars. China is thinking along similar lines. Giddens argues that a US-China deal on climate and energy could drive the whole world in the same direction.
Yda Schreuder goes one step further. Who can tell the politicians what to do? Ultimately, the answer is the transnational corporations, the people who do most of the actual emitting. So they - not the scientists, economists or politicians - are the key players. Again, it makes sense. If big corporations can make more money out of reducing emissions than increasing them, then they will fix the system so that is what happens. That's how most clean-ups work: the guys with the large R&D and investment budgets decide they can gain a competitive edge, and instigate a race to the top.
The tipping point where that happens may not be far off. We must hope so, as scientists say we need to be reducing global emissions by 2020 at the latest. Schreuder proposes encouraging action with "sectoral agreements" reached and policed by polluting industries such as aluminium smelting, electricity generation and cement manufacture. It would not be fair, but it might be effective.
All three books agree that we have, or soon will have, the technologies needed to cut emissions by the 80 or 90 per cent being called for by scientists. And that technology is not so expensive. The problem is organising our economics, politics and industries to deliver. None of the books offers a blueprint, but all three have useful things to say about how we might edge our way along the road.
Unfortunately, all three were also clearly conceived and largely written before the current economic crisis. While each offers a line or two on the topic, none manages a critique of whether environmental breakdown is implicated in the financial crash - through too much money chasing too few resources, perhaps, or droughts destabilising food prices, or switchback energy prices as we approach peak oil.
Still less do they say if there is a solution to the one without fixing the other. This is a shame, particularly as politicians queue up to warn that 2009 is the very year they cannot be expected to tackle climate change. The climate will not wait.
Fred Pearce is the author of Confessions of an Eco Sinner (Eden Project Books).

Load-Date: May 12, 2009


End of Document




Should business leaders speak out more on climate change?; Catch up on all the highlights from our live debate on the role of business in vocalising the environmental agenda - see the panel guests
The Guardian
January 25, 2016 Monday 3:28 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 5519 words
Byline: Tom Levitt
Body


block-time published-time 2.46pm BST 
Thank you to our all our panel guests (see full list). As a final comment, I'd like to highlight a couple of interesting points from Andy Rowell and Eliot Whittington.
Andy Rowell says: Can business leaders be expected to commit to legitimate, realistic pledges or could pledges turn into a publicity campaign in getting a positive reputation in an increasingly aware community of consumers?I am afraid the oil industry has a history of greenwashing on pledges to tackle climate change - BP's pledge and multi-million campaign to go "beyond Petroleum" just after the Millenium being the most obvious one. Fifteen years later, the company is more dependent on oil and gas than ever.. So I think you have to be very careful of spin..
And in response, Eliot Whittington says: While that's true, I think you're missing out part of the picture. Under one CEO (Lord Browne) BP did have a commitment to renewables and make some investments - they then dismantled that when the leadership changed. You can critique the pledge, but I think it's important to recognise there was a change in strategy away from it.
A nod to the importance of business leadership then...
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.39pm BST 
 What advice would you give business leaders?  
 Now for some closing comments from our panel guests.  What advice would they give business leaders? 
Edward Cameron: I would tell them the world is changing. Climate change is already impacting their supply chains, operations, workers, and markets and if they fail to act they will exacerbate their risk. I would tell them that we have an unprecedented opportunity to create a better economy and that governments and other businesses are rising to the challenge. I would tell them that they cannot stand apart from this movement towards a new climate economy without running the risk of damage to their brand and ceding growth opportunities to others who are more innovative. but most importantly I would listen to them. Understand their business. Try to design a strategy tailored for them. And stop preaching.... as I do that far too much already.
Clare Hieron:  I would say: be brave but be honest - pledges are fine but the long term viability of your business relies on your ability to deliver on a low carbon business plan so don't be tempted by green-wash!
Andrew Crane:  Business likes a level playing field, so it is imperative that business leaders are united in calling for tough, international climate change rules that affect everyone.
Ben Kellard:  Clarify your strategic, longer term material issues (and how you can contribute to a sustainable future) and develop bold goals around them. Then distinguish between what you can act on directly and what you can do (creatively) to influence and shape the wider market/system to create a more sustainable future.
Andy Rowell: The climate science is telling us that the time to act is now, not tomorrow. Fine words and pledges are no longer enough.. its time for radical action.
Eliot Whittington: If I was speaking to a business leader now I'd steal Edward & Veronica's refrain that this change is inevitable and you are either with it or against it, but I'd also add that if you don't play a visible constructive role in making the change happen - working to bring about a new, low-carbon, low-climate risk, sustainable economy, then sooner or later you will find that despite your best efforts policies to support the change will be introduced and you will have missed your chance to shape them and develop them to be efficient, cost effective and effective in helping you change as quickly as possible. You won't make this agenda go away but instead you will just store up problems for the future.
Veronica Lie: ...Remind them that the most important ingredient in engagement is actually not speaking but listening: 'We have two ears and one mouth so that we can listen twice as much as we speak.'
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.43pm BST
block-time published-time 2.21pm BST 
And another answer in response to the carbon tax question ( see 13:55 ) 
Andrew Crane: If even oil sands companies are asking for a higher price for carbon, you know it has reached a pretty major threshold of acceptability:http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2015/05/22/boss-of-biggest-oilsands-_n_7423096.html
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39pm BST
block-time published-time 2.19pm BST 
Another response to Heather Kilgour's external costs question ( See: 13:55 ) and specifically on the issue of a carbon tax.
Edward Cameron says: I would say the two things I hear most often from business on this issue is that they would like to have policy certainty and a price on carbon. So personally, I believe it is both a powerful incentive to climate ambition but also one that could get support politically and from the business community. If set up correctly it could also help us to address regressive taxes elsewhere in the system. We would likely need to be agnostic about the method as one jurisdiction might be more disposed towards emissions trading and another might lean towards a tax. We would also have to do a far better job of setting them up than has been the experience to date (i.e. lets not give permits away for free when government revenue can grow by selling them!!!) but overall I think the future lies in carbon pricing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41pm BST
block-time published-time 2.15pm BST 
 Is the system at fault, rather than business?  
Julian Spindler has asked: How can business leaders promote climate change solutions when their businesses are based on a free market "growth"model, the very antithesis of what is needed? Fundamentally, climate change is the result of massive, unsustainable over consumption. 
In response...
Ben Kellard says: That's right that our current consumer model of 'take- make- waste' based on (relatively) cheap oil has fuelled CC, however it raises the question over what kind of 'growth' we need. We are expecting another 2bn people by 2050 and we aren't able to currently meet the needs of 7bn with our current resources, so I think we need a step change in our political economy that incentivises and delivers solutions that are low carbon and resource efficient products and services that meet real human needs.
Eliot Whittington says: We absolutely do need a fundamental rewiring of the economy if we are to tackle climate change and other sustainability challenges. And I think there are business leaders who get that - they know that their business and the economy they operate in looks fundamentally different in the future. What I think they, and the rest of us, are feeling towards is how do we get there? Ideas like that about the circular economy are starting to answer this, but there's a way to go.
 Related:  The end of capitalism has begun
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm BST
block-time published-time 2.12pm BST 
In response to Veronica Lie's answer to whether business leaders should speak out or not ( see 14:03 ), Andrew Crane says: I think you are right Veronica, but two things stand out for me: 1. Your comment in parenthesis that it depends if leaders are on the right side of the argument. This is really important but often with public issues there is no clear right side, except of perhaps whether the majority of their stakeholders agree. Climate change is a little different because there is such a huge scientific consensus, but that is not the case for lots of other issues that business leaders have spoken out on, such as same-sex marriage, immigration, health care and others. 2. The risks you mention (e.g. bad publicity) tend to be short term, while the rewards (e.g. addressing climate change) are often more long term. So business leaders often value the risks higher, even if the rewards are, in principle, much greater.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 2.05pm BST 
Andy Rowell draws attention to Edward Cameron's point about fossil fuel subsidies.
We are talking about billions and billions of consumer and production subsidies. As Damian Carrington pointed out yesterday in the Guardian, according to the IMF: "Subsidies for fossil fuels amount to $1,000 (£640) a year for every citizen living in the G20 group of the world's leading economies, despite the group's pledge in 2009 to phase out support for coal, oil and gas." 
It goes without saying that this is total economic and ecological madness which Governments seem incapable of fixing, despite numerous pledges to the contrary..
 Related:  G20 countries pay over $1,000 per citizen in fossil fuel subsidies, says IMF
block-time published-time 2.04pm BST 
And one more response ( see 14:03 below ) from Gabrielle Walker...  Yes indeed, spot on Veronica and Edward. As Richard Sandor (founder of the Chicago Climate Exchange) memorably put it: "If you're not at the table, you're on the menu!"
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56pm BST
block-time published-time 2.03pm BST 
 Should business leaders speak out or not?  
 Should business leaders speak out or not?  
Veronica Lie: It's risky, I think, for business leaders to stay silent and inactive on issues that matter to their stakeholders. The silent will not escape judgment; they'll be dismissed as irrelevant.
Ben Kellard: I agree and I think we have reached the point where the risks of businesses staying silent are greater than speaking out. 
Edward Cameron: We often use the old adage that "you can lead the parade or get run over by it". A new low-GHG economy is being created all around us. This summer alone more than 40 countries have come forward with climate action plans representing almost 60% of global emissions. In addition we have seen more than 140 companies with a combined market value of in excess of $2tn commit to climate action through the We Mean Business Campaign. They are all helping to create a new economy. The resilient business of the future will seize this as an opportunity and help shape it. The businesses who fail to act will be left behind.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.53pm BST
block-time published-time 2.00pm BST 
Another response to Heather Kilgour below from Andy Rowell: Heather Kilgour asks a great question: Maybe if companies were responsible for all the externalities including pollution then this would not even be an issue?I think if companies did pay the full external cost then certainly people would not fly so much and we would radicaly rethink how and why we travel - It is cheaper to fly to Iceland and back from Bristol than get a single train to London - and that's not even a peak ticket. It makes no climate sense at all.
And if airlines and airports had to pay the full cost of their carbon dioxide emissions, their noise pollution as well as other more localised pollution, many would argue there would not be any need for a 3rd runway at Heathrow, for example..
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 1.55pm BST 
 Business must face true costs of actions  
Heather Kilgour is asks: Maybe if companies were responsible for all the externalities including pollution then this would not even be an issue? 
In response...
Ben Kellard says: The challenge is that, unless a price is costed in globally, it risks becoming marginalised (and capital may move to another region) or an exercise in wooden dollars, as opposed to something real on the balance sheet.
Edward Cameron says: Consider China for a second. China says that up to 28% of its emissions are embedded in goods that are consumed overseas. As a result it claims that the consuming countries - mostly the EU and US - should be responsible essentially for the externalities of those emissions. They manufacture the goods but someone else demands and uses them. Many companies make the same argument - either by saying their emissions are coming from their suppliers or from their consumers. So it actually becomes difficult to determine responsibility. 
Elliot Whittington says: This is the logic that leads to a lot of support for mechanisms like a carbon price - which would internalise climate impacts into companies' business model. However the political reality is that we're unlikely to get very high carbon prices that could deliver the kinds of change required and the economic reality is that a single price signal is not necessarily the right, efficient policy framework to really unlock the potential of innovation. So in practice a carbon price is a necessary but not sufficient response to climate change, and I suspect that's true for other issues too.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm BST
block-time published-time 1.51pm BST 
NoMoreMrNice then asks: Given the doubts over greenwash, and the difficulties of comparing companies, how can more be done to help those really showing leadership to stand out? Without this their public statements will always be undermined by a public scepticism (whether justified or not).
In response, Clare Hierons says: I think this is where the NGO community can help by putting forward initiatives that leaders can champion and put their name to without the risk of backlash. Rather than compete with each other they can back campaigns that drive a whole agenda forward and provide consistent commentary. RE100 is mentioned in the earlier discussion - this is a straightforward commitment for companies to switch to renewable energy sources. http://there100.org /
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.52pm BST
block-time published-time 1.49pm BST 
So good points made by NoMoreMrNice:... speaking out alone is not enough; as somebody working for an organisation that shows more vocal than practical leadership, I know that often what our suppliers hear is "X want to be seen as green, so they've put out a press release - that's nice. Means nothing to us though". I'm sure many politicians hear this as well; they know that a firm saying 'we want a sustainable future' does not necessarily mean they're saying 'we'll back a party promising aggressive carbon cuts'.
Part of the problem is the difficulty over understanding how green a company is - or even what green means - without which we can't really evaluate whether their actions match the rhetoric. When even a simple product like paper can be FSC, recycled, or (in a particularly egregious example of greenwash packaging I saw 'suitable for recycling' shown against a recycling logo on green background) assessing the full impacts of a multinational is nigh on impossible.
But it's still essential; what's needed is greater focus on some of the accreditations designed to promote sustainable practice and transparency. We need to move away from 'x is a sustainable company; they have a wind turbine at their head office' to a proper narrative that engages with business responsibilities. That cannot be done, in my view, without much stronger, simpler, more transparent certification.
block-time published-time 1.48pm BST 
Andy Rowell picking up on the politics issue (13:58). In response to Dr. Neil Cutland I think it is clear that the Conservatives - having gotten rid of the Lib Dem hand-brake - are now showing their true anti-green credentials. They are clearly anti-renewables and pro-fracking, and will do a mimimum on climate, but will spin that differently in the run up to Paris. We cannot forget that many Tory backbenchers and some Ministers are climate sceptics.
Where, you ask, are the powerful business voices, criticising the Government's environmental record since May? There have been some Andy...
 Related:  Green cuts risk sending UK back to the dark ages
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm BST
block-time published-time 1.43pm BST 
Follow the money says Edward Cameron in response to Andy Rowell and Ben Kellard: I think Andy makes a great point about following the money. The climate negotiations are focused on moving $100bn per year in support of climate action. But that amount of money is not enough to change the direction of the global economy - worth in excess of $90tn. So we need to persuade mainstream investors to finance the transition to a low-carbon future and that means putting in place the right incentives. This means creating new financial vehicles (i.e. green bonds) and crucially eliminating the perverse subsidies that make fossil fuels artificially competitive.
block-time published-time 1.41pm BST 
Another response to politics question ( see 13:38 ), Andrew Crane says politics  do  matter... There was a nice study published a couple of years ago demonstrating that the political beliefs of CEOs (measured by their political donations to republican or democrat parties in the US) had a significant correlation with how well their firms performed on social responsibility, irrespective of whether the CEOs spoke up. Basically firms led by democrat CEOs invested more in CSR than those led by Republicans. So political affiliations do matter: http://asq.sagepub.com/content/58/2/197
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm BST
block-time published-time 1.40pm BST 
In response to politics question ( see 13:38 ), Clare Heirons says: Politics and policy need to be separated - if businesses are genuinely trying to act in the right way and find themselves constrained by legislation then speaking out is helpful. The picture gets skewed when businesses lobby to lock in business models that protect short term gain at the expense of long-term global viability.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.42pm BST
block-time published-time 1.38pm BST 
In response to below ( see 13:38 ), Edward Cameron says: I think a broad array of interests prevent companies from speaking out. If you consider the United States for a moment, a company wishing to speak out on climate change faces a Congress controlled by climate skeptics. They need to work with that Congress on trade issues, intellectual property issues, corporate tax, and every other issue under the sun. Many of them are fearful of alienating potential allies on one issue by speaking publically on climate. The net affect is that many companies are working on climate behind the scenes but reluctant to be too vocal. This has got to change but its not easy. If you were to ask me right now what is the one new element that I would like to see in this debate to help us advance the climate agenda it would be a coalition of conservative Americans - from companies, the faith based community, and ideally from State-administration in red States to come out in favor of climate action. The danger right now is that this does seem to be turning into a Liberal - Conservative split and that is very damaging.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.42pm BST
block-time published-time 1.38pm BST 
Dr Neil Cutland has sent in the following question: Given  that the Conservative government has scrapped, reversed or diluted at least six significant environmental policies since it took power in May, business leaders increasingly have to be the ones who lead on the agenda. But are business leaders really likely to do so, given the Government's clearly indicated direction of travel? 
block-time published-time 1.36pm BST 
Veronica Lie warns of the dangers of backlash at those business leaders speaking out: Obviously political activism can backfire (eg when Brendan Eich of Mozilla advocated against gay rights), and this can negatively affect the company.What's important here is that business leaders are on the right side of the argument, 'the right side of the future' (as Nick Butler wrote yesterday in the FT). I think the public respects business leaders who speak up when they feel that the speaker is on their side, supporting society's progress rather than preserving the status quo for personal gain.
block-time published-time 1.36pm BST 
In answer to Anna's tweet, Andrew Crane states: The question of how we monitor corporate commitments is an important one, and I think here obviously the role played by NGOs, the media and academia is critical. With declining donations for NGOs, a newspaper industry in decline and restricted funding for universities, the potential for serious investigation of these commitments is at risk, despite the rise in social media
block-time published-time 1.35pm BST 
 Business not the only ones with responsibility  
Speaking out in sympathy towards business leaders, Matthew2012 makes a fair point: "It might be the easy part but it could make a real difference politically. If you look at the statistics businesses have been lowering their GHG output far more than the residential sector. Yes, this may have been from a very dubious base but nonetheless they have been doing things. Is it enough? No. But this mainly fallls at the doorstep of government and the available energy sources available to the business. There are a large number of barriers to even aiming to bypass the government all together. Businesses need to make it very clear what they believe the government needs to do to help them lower their emissions further."
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.28pm BST
block-time published-time 1.32pm BST 
enltrTo what extent can the vision of one CEO be implemented effectively across all aspects of a global supply chain? #askGSB
 - Anna Watson (@AnnaHolliday) August 5, 2015
block-time published-time 1.31pm BST 
Edward Cameron is raging against conflicting positions taken by both government and business: How many governments advance policy objectives under the heading of "climate action" but then contradict their stated objective under for example "agricultural policy". Unfortunately the EU is a prime example of this with the CAP. Or how many development agencies sign up to climate action only to fund coal projects. I think we need to take a holistic approach to this problem and eliminate inconsistencies - or even hypocrisies - but again this is not just a problem for the business community.
block-time published-time 1.30pm BST 
In a nod of approval to the Guardian's Keep it in the Ground  debate, Andy Rowell says: Everyone could do more to hold the industry to account. The City and pension funds for example still invest billions on oil and gas. Most local authorities invest too. They should be putting their money where their mouth is and disinvesting if they think these companies are acting irresponsibly.
block-time published-time 1.25pm BST 
Another response to Andy Rowell's point (see 13:15), this time from Andrew Crane : Great point Andy. And this just shows how tough it is to "discern when a business is environmentally concerned" as Anne asks. Too many companies simultaneously make major investments in sustainability with one part of their business while systematically undermining regulation through their lobbying efforts in Washington or Brussels
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.13pm BST
block-time published-time 1.25pm BST 
Edward Cameron says: Let's be clear there is a long history of everyone looking after their own interests. The diplomatic negotiations have been bogged down for more than two decades because of the exercise of national self-interest. I personally believe this is changing on all fronts. through the We Mean Business Campaign ( www.wemeanbusinesscoalition.org ) (external link) we are seeing more and more companies coming forward with very ambitious plans for GHG reductions
block-time published-time 1.24pm BST 
Eliot Whittington says: Just to pick up on the last phrase ( 13:23 ), while I think this can be evidenced, I don't think this can be proved. There are lots of guidelines out there - commitments for companies to take, projects like the Science Based Targets group or the UN guidelines for responsible lobbying. There are lots of ways that you can investigate what a company is doing and what it says, (although there's also often big transparency gaps). But in the end judgement is called for. You have to make a call on what you think is the right bar for companies to hit given their context and role.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50pm BST
block-time published-time 1.23pm BST 
In response to the question around guidelines and monitoring businesses ( see 13:20 ), Ben Kellard says: There has been a lot of good work that sets out the expectations of businesses to contribute towards sustainability trends. There are the WBCSD Action 2020, there is also http://futurefitbusiness.org / work done by the Natural Step and Bob Doppelt, all useful contributions and frameworks that organisations can use to identify their materials issues and set goals.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.51pm BST
block-time published-time 1.22pm BST 
Just before we come to everyone's answers on this second question, Clare Heirons from ShareAction has picked up on Andy Rowell's earlier point (see 13:15) : Companies need to be called up when their actions clearly don't match their rhetoric! A concerning trend here is the use of convincing-sounding arguments such as the recent adoption of carbon pricing as a solution by the oil majors. Transparency is key - leaders need to make commitments in language that anyone can understand (especially if they want to be believed!)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.12pm BST
block-time published-time 1.20pm BST 
 How do we monitor business promises?  
    Moving onto a second question.   Anne White has asked: How does one discern when a business is environmentally concerned? What guidelines would be crafted? What evidentiary proof could be established?  
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.18pm BST
block-time published-time 1.19pm BST 
And Eliot Whittington, deputy director of policy, Prince of Wales's Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change (CLG) adds his thoughts:  Speaking out is not a panacea or a substitute for recognising the real impact and importance of environmental issues like climate change within their core business, but, like it or not, businesses play a key role in developing and delivering policy, and if there aren't positive voices, the negative ones will dominate.
block-time published-time 1.17pm BST 
Veronica Lie from Xynteo suggests that by having this debate we are perhaps indicating that business has become disconnected from society: I also think that the question shows how we've tended to sever business from society - it should take an interest in public issues because it is a part of society. This compartmentalisation is part of what's got us into the mess we're in now.
block-time published-time 1.15pm BST 
Investigative journalist and director at Spinwatch Andy Rowell calls for a little more action: I think business leaders not only have to speak up much more on climate, but their words need to be backed up by radical and concerted action.The next few months leading up to the crucial UN climate talks in Paris are critical. There is no substantial leadership on this issue from the big oil companies.
For example, Europe's two largest oil and gas companies Shell and BP - which recently urged action on climate change - are still basing their projections for fossil fuel use on scenarios which would see catastrophic levels of global warming. On the one hand they talk about the need for action - on the other they just carry on drilling regardless.
Shell's ill-judged attempt to drill in the Arctic is systematic of this. The company is exposing itself to huge financial and ecological risk by drilling for oil in the Arctic. It is oil we can never afford to burn if we are going to try and keep to 2 degrees warming.
block-time published-time 1.14pm BST 
Although in response, Andrew crane says: Well I think we have to be careful in saying they are stakeholders "like everyone else". No one else really has their power and influence, so they need to really engage in a way that doesn't seek to dominate or derail the debate
block-time published-time 1.13pm BST 
Edward Cameron, from BSR, says: They should speak out on issues as they are stakeholders in society like everyone else. they are exposed to climate risk like everyone else. And they are agents of change like everyone else. Many businesses have greater reach than governments. Unilever for example are present in 8/10 homes around the world every day. They can therefore use their brand, their investments and their credibility for enormous good. And does it help? It does indeed because suppliers listen to their buyers, and politicians take heed of what they hear from the private sector.
block-time published-time 1.09pm BST 
Good point from Andrew Crane, Professor of Business Ethics, Schulich School of Business too: I think that if done right, it certainly can help. When business leaders speak, people (especially governments) listen. The risk is that they tend to talk from a self-interested position, rather than one considering the broader public interest
block-time published-time 1.08pm BST 
Ben Kellard from Forum for the Future says:  The business community in general aren't being anything like clear enough with governments and other stakeholders that climate change poses massive risk for businesses, especially those with agricultural supply chains. This challenges the misplaced conception that responding to climate change is bad for business. So I would like to see them being much clearer and more vocal that its in the private sector's interests for all stakeholder to tackle these issues.
block-time published-time 1.05pm BST 
 Opening question and answers  
To kick-off, I have asked the panel to give their perspective on the title question of this debate: Should business leaders speak out on public issues, such as climate change? Does it help? 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.27pm BST
block-time published-time 12.48pm BST 
This live debate will start very shortly. Thank you to all our panel guests, who are now ready and waiting to take your questions. 
We've got a pile of questions ready and waiting - sent in over the past week. Il bring both these questions and any other that we get sent in as we go through the debate. 
If you want to send a question in please use the comments section below or tweet us @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB.
block-time published-time 12.38pm BST 
Another one of our panel guests Edward Cameron from BSR, has been busy giving his perspective on Obama's climate announcement. 
"Whether you look at the political scene, or whether you look at the movement within the business community, I think you see an irreversible and irresistible movement toward decarbonization," Cameron concluded.
block-time published-time 10.16am BST 
Ahead of today's discussion, one of our panel guests Andrew Crane, professor of Business Ethics at Schulich School of Business has written a blogpost outlining his thoughts.
While warning business leaders against hypocrisy and making grandoise plans that cannot be delivered, he argues that aspirational talk isn't all bad...
For all the problems of greenwashing, business leaders making aspirational statements about social issues shouldn't automatically be criticized. For one thing, in the context of challenging, complex problems, it is often imperative that business leaders do go outside their comfort zones and articulate "stretch" goals that they can not necessarily know if or how they can achieve. Consider Interface Carpet's mission to reduce their waste to zero by 2020. When they started their 'mission zero' journey in 1994, former CEO Ray Anderson did not have a plan for how this would be realized only that he needed to set a vision that was inspiring enough to galvanize the entire company. Since then, Interface has cut waste to landfill by more than 90% and GHG emissions per unit of production are down almost 75%. The company is rightly lauded as a sustainability leader that others should follow. The lesson is that there is scope for business leaders to be aspirational but sooner or later they need to back up their words with sustained action.
block-time published-time 12.22pm BST 
 The panel guests  
When Richard Branson speaks out on tackling climate change does it help? 
With a growing number of CEOs publicly committing their companies to taking action on climate change, what difference can their pronouncements make? Can they persuade others to follow suit, or encourage governments to legislate? 
Or is society not yet ready to believe commitments made by the business community. Branson, for example, has been criticised for failing to deliver on a $3bn climate pledge made back in 2006. 
Join the following panel on Wednesday 5 August 1-2:30pm BST to discuss the topic:
 Andy Rowell, freelance journalist and director at Spinwatch Clare Hierons, director, ShareAction Andrew Crane, Professor of Business Ethics, Schulich School of Business Edward Cameron, managing director for partnership development and research, BSR Veronica Lie, head of communications and strategy, Xynteo Ben Kellard, head of sustainable business, Forum for the Future Eliot Whittington, deputy director of policy, Prince of Wales's Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change (CLG)
You can submit your questions in the comments section at the bottom of the page, or send them to us on Twitter at @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.54pm BST

Load-Date: January 25, 2016


End of Document




After climate cuts at CSIRO, who should we ask about global warming impacts on Australia? Netflix?; Former senior CSIRO climate scientist explains climate models in Australia were not being used to 'prove' climate change. That had happened long ago
The Guardian
February 5, 2016 Friday 2:58 AM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 971 words
Byline: Graham Readfearn
Body


Dr Penny Whetton had spent 25 years working on climate change modelling for Australia's premier science agency, but in 2014 it was time to go.
"I could see the writing on the wall," says Whetton, who put up her hand to take a redundancy package in October 2014.
This week, she has heard of the anger and sadness among her former CSIRO colleagues at the news that climate change research is being targeted for cutbacks and redundancies.
Whetton still holds an Honorary Research Fellow position at the agency, where she had worked as a senior principal research scientist and one of the key people leading the CSIRO's climate modelling work.
She is one of a very small handful of Australian scientists to have been a lead author on three consecutive Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports.
Her central role has been to use climate models to work out the implications for climate change on Australia. Whetton had also been a leader of the project to deliver the latest climate change projections across Australia, released last year.
In short, Whetton has intimate knowledge of what Australia's climate modelling expertise is being used for.
This week's announcement by CSIRO executive director Larry Marshall has angered many in the country's climate science community, who have been queuing up to criticise the moves.
But beyond the implications of the announcement, there has also been much bemusement about Marshall's statements and his apparent simplistic understanding of aspects of climate science.
If Whetton saw the writing on the wall in October 2014 then surely everyone else should have been able to see the letters scrawled metres high when Marshall was appointed that same month.
In one of his first interviews, Marshall appeared to be intrigued by water dowsing - the ancient idea that farmers could use sticks together with a mysterious unidentified perception to find water under the soil.
Former CSIRO chief of Land and Water told Science at the time that he was "appalled" by Marshall's statements on dowsing. 
Marshall has a scientific background (he studied physics), but before taking the job at CSIRO he had spent 25 years in Silicon Valley starting tech companies and working as a venture capitalist.
In an email to staff this week, Marshall acknowledged Australia's climate models were "among the best in the world", saying "our measurements honed those models to prove global climate change".
Elsewhere, Marshall has said that we "spent probably a decade trying to answer the question 'is the climate changing'" before then suggesting that "after Paris, that question has been answered".
There are several things wrong here. One is that the main use of CSIRO's climate modelling work has not been to "prove" that humans are changing the climate.
Another is the frankly bizarre idea that the question of human influence on the climate was answered only three months ago at the Paris climate talks.
Dr Whetton told me: "At what point did we know with a high level of certainty that humans were changing the climate? Well, the IPCC in 2007 said human influence was unequivocal."
While it's true that models have been used to measure human impacts, this has not been the focus of modelling work at CSIRO. 
"The work [at CSIRO] was very much supporting climate adaptation work," says Whetton.
"Proving global climate change? I don't know what [Marshall] means by that. That's settled. What needs to be further pursued are the details of regional climate change.
"The models are there to understand how the climate works but also to make projections for the future. That's the information that you need to do appropriate adaptation planning and to calculate costs and benefits of mitigation actions.
"None of that regional climate work is settled. We need to refine our projections."
As an example, Whetton pointed out that while there was now a lot of evidence pointing to a decline in rainfall in the south of Australia, there was "less certainty" about what would happen in the north.
The north of Australia happens to be the area where the Liberal Government has fantasised about creating new food bowls, new industries and new communities. 
Professor Steve Sherwood, the director of the University of New South Wales Climate Change Research Centre said: "Marshall speaks of contributing to the proposed agricultural development of the Northern Territory, but we don't know for how much longer this region will still support agriculture or even human habitation as the Earth keeps warming, nor how much drying (if any) Australia's existing agricultural regions will experience. 
"The groups that would help provide answers are the ones he says we don't need any more." 
In interviews this week, Marshall has said he has been inspired by the approach taken by Netflix and its high performance culture.
Professor Samantha Hepburn, Director of the Centre for Energy and Natural Resources Law at Deakin Law School, pointed out that CSIRO was "not a technology startup" but was a "crucial agency for social and environmental progression". 
Whetton said the reaction among her former colleagues had been "initially shock and disbelief" because many had not seen the latest announcement coming. 
"Certainly now there's a lot of anger as well," she said, "but we don't know the full details yet." 
"It is not just that people feel their jobs are under personal threat," she said. "They can't imagine why such an important part of scientific research to support Australia's decision making is to be shut down. It is difficult to believe that anything like our current efforts will be maintained.
"New modelling work is being done right now. Who will do the job that CSIRO has always done in interpreting those models to understand the impacts for Australia. Where will that advice come from in the future?"
Perhaps we could ask Netflix?

Load-Date: February 5, 2016


End of Document




Global climate march 2015: Pope Francis and Ban Ki-moon donate 'marching shoes' - live; Millions expected to take to streets ahead of Paris climate summit Sydney to Seattle, via Hong Kong, Berlin, London and Sao Paulo, march on SundayClimate change protests take place across Australia Keep it in the ground: the Guardian's climate change campaignInteractive: why we are joining the global climate march
The Guardian
November 29, 2015 Sunday 1:39 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 10094 words
Byline: Claire Phipps in Sydney, Adam Vaughan in London
Body


block-time published-time 1.39pm GMT 
Here's some video of Corbyn's speech, via James Randerson. Apologies for it being split into four parts:
block-time published-time 1.29pm GMT 
 Corbyn: make world leaders act at Paris  
Corbyn, standing atop a fire engine in London next to shadow chancellor John McDonnell, tells his audience to send a message to the more than 147 world leaders expected to attend the Paris climate talks:
Make them understand that if we are to bequeath to future generations a world of flooding, a world of environmental disaster, a world where our children will not be able to live or eat properly, then they will do nothing and allow the pollution of this planet to continue. If however, they listen to the words of millions all around the world: it is possible to reduce the level of emissions, it is possible to slow the rate of temperature change, it is possible to protect large parts fo the environment of this planet, then they will have done something useful. Our message today is to them: do what you are sent there to do. 
Videos to come shortly.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.37pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.22pm GMT 
Cecelia Anim, president of the Royal College of Nursing, tells me: 
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges we face. If it goes unchecked climate changewill be devastating for human health and will put a huge strain on our health system. Every healthcare professional has a duty to raise awareness of climate change. Health professionals must lead the way. 
 Related:  UK reversing and undoing climate change policies, say doctors and nurses
block-time published-time 1.14pm GMT 
 Anti-capitalists clash with police in Paris  
In Paris a group of socialist activists who have been circling La Place de la Republique have confronted police at one of the exits of the famous roundabout. Tear gas and batons are being used to push them back. 
It appears to be a high jacking of the climate march by those with another agenda. "It is more to against capitalism [than a call for climate action]," said one. 
Police just set off large bangs to deter the crowd. Which incensed them because of the resemblance to bombs. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.07pm GMT 
I've been speaking with fashion designer Vivienne Westwood in London, who said:
It looks great. We are the people. Politicians are criminals. They are trapped in the rotten financial system which is the cause of poverty war and climate change. Politicians just talk about how they are going to deal with it. How are they going to deal with what will be absolute horror? These idiots accept it. We need to stop it! There is no choice between the green economy and mass extinction.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.57pm GMT 
All parties were invited to speak in London but the Conservative party did not provide anyone. Lynne Featherstone is here from the Liberal Democrats. "We never find enough words to convey the cataclysm ahead. Unless we mitigate and adapt, the world will be in the greatest trouble we have ever seen," she said. Caroline Lucas is there for the Greens and Corbyn for Labour.
block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT 
The wind is blowing hard, the rain is coming down but still the people have come to London in their thousands. People have travelled here from Wales, Scotland and fracking communities in Lancashire who are standing right at the front. One group from Brighton travelled here on a bus powered by chip fat, according to organisers. There are people from the Sápmi indigenous community in Sweden, where the melting arctic is having a big impact on their daily lives.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.38pm GMT 
 Tens of thousands at London march  
The Press Association is reporting that tens of thousands of people have gathered in central London for the march. I'll update you on numbers later, based on what organisers and police say.
block-time published-time 12.28pm GMT 
And here's Corbyn in London, where he's due to speak shortly ( see 12:03 ). Next to him is Lisa Nandy MP, shadow energy and climate change secretary.
enltrIt may be a wet and windy Sunday in London but Labour are out in force for today's #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/JaV4JLRTGl
 - Labour Energy (@labourenergy) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 12.24pm GMT 
Our reporter Karl Mathiesen is in Paris where the police are still out in numbers following the attacks just over a fortnight ago: 
enltrNo marching. But lots of police in Paris today. pic.twitter.com/Y20XbreqBR
 - Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
enltrInstead of marching the streets. About 200-300 Parisians are circling around the monument in Place de la republique.
- Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.22pm GMT 
The march in London is attracting some big crowds, colourful outfits and famous faces (I've seen at least one Instagrammed selfie with musician Peter Gabriel. Actor Emma Thompson and singer/activist Charlotte Church are also out there somewhere). Emma Howard is on the ground for the Guardian and will be reporting live throughout the day.
enltrLondon climate march is turning out well pic.twitter.com/ArhmNVG9Hj
 - Jacob Dixon (@Justabitofjacob) November 29, 2015
enltrRight at the front with the indigenous peoples, leading London's #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/7il4EN9bQT
 - James Tennent (@duckytennent) November 29, 2015
enltrA pack of polar bears beside Wellingon Arch in London for the #ClimateMarch. pic.twitter.com/qefRkS1st5
 - Claire Marshall (@BBCMarshall) November 29, 2015
enltrReady to march with the Suffolk Greens #cop21#ClimateMarch#Londonpic.twitter.com/2g1EJFfUM4
 - SuffolkCoastalGreens (@SuffCoastGreens) November 29, 2015
Even the BT tower is joining in:
enltrIn #London ? Share your pictures of the BT Tower which is supporting #go100percent renewable energy #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/hJt2d4cpGs
 - BT Better Future (@BTBetterFuture) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.03pm GMT 
 Addressing inequality essential for tackling climate change, Corbyn to say  
Here's an excerpt of what Corbyn is expected to say in around half an hour's time:
The greener world I know is possible is a more just, a more equal, and a more productive world
To tackle climate change, we must tackle global inequality, we must show that defeating the menace of global warming will not only improve the prospects of our children and grandchildren, but will improve lives here and now 
Britain should be at the forefront of that argument, leading global efforts to a political solution to climate change at the Paris conference. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.59am GMT 
People have marched across Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, in Yemen, Tanzania, Singapore, South Africa and Benin among many other countries.
Around 70 people reportedly turned up in Sanaa in Yemen, despite reported bombing by airplanes just a few miles away.
Walid Yehia Hassan Al-Hashef, an Avaaz member in Sanaa has written in to say: 
Airstrike targets crowds of people and today early morning an airstrike hit around 4km from our protest location. We expected 150 people because of the airstrike only around 70 people showed up.
Yes, I have a message to every human being on our planet... In Yemen we are peaceful people we do not have place in our behaviors or culture for terror. We in Yemen love all people christians, jews, muslims and others.
     Yemen climate change protest on 29 November 2015. Photograph: Avaaz     
undltr #UNVolunteers#actioncounts#MarcheClimat#COP21pic.twitter.com/KqFIX8O7Vq
 - UN Benin (@UNBenin) November 29, 2015Singapore sends its love to Paris as a Green Heart
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By autumnclean
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 9:43 
Marches are getting underway in Berlin and Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam is raring to go!! 
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By guardianUser11784703
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:51 
Climate Change March begins outside Berlin HBF
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Amy Newiss
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 11:17 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.45am GMT 
 Latvian president: deal in Paris 'quite close'  
 Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis, Europe's first Green party head of state, tells Reuters that because most countries have already submitted their climate plans, a deal in Paris in two weeks' time is close. 
"...We are quite close to... an accord and a new Kyoto agreement, which would be a Paris agreement, hopefully will be reached," he said in reference to the 1997 Kyoto protocol, the only previous legally-binding international climate treaty.
Vejonis also said he hoped all leaders would agree on a "legally-binding document" in Paris, apparently putting him at odds with the US, which has made clear it does not want a treaty.
block-time published-time 11.34am GMT 
In case you were wondering (like me) what was going to happen to all the shoes in Place de la Republique, Avaaz tells me that they are being given to a social enterprise called Relais 75 Emmaus that works with homeless people.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am GMT
block-time published-time 11.26am GMT 
 Maurice Strong has died  
Tributes have been paid to Maurice Strong, the first executive director at the UN environment programme (Unep), who has died aged 86. He was also the secretary general at the Stockholm environment meeting in 1972 and Rio Earth Summit in 1992, which paved the way for the Paris climate summit that people are marching for today.
    Maurice Strong. Photograph: David Karp/AP   
The current Unep chief, Achim Steiner, said: "Strong will forever be remembered for placing the environment on the international agenda and at the heart of development. He shepherd global environmental governance processes."
Steiner added that a strong deal at Paris would be a "fitting tribute" to Strong's legacy. We'll have more on this later from my colleague John Vidal, who knew Strong. 
In his last interview with the Guardian, in 2010, Strong said of the state of the world's environment and the challenge of climate change:
Analytically, I'm pessimistic. I believe the odds are against us for making the changes we need to make in time. But, operationally, I'm optimistic because I believe that it is still possible. Tougher the longer we delay it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.36am GMT
block-time published-time 11.18am GMT 
 Human chain in Paris  
The march that was expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people on the streets of Paris today may have been forbidden, but there are still plenty of people out calling for action on climate change in the French capital today. 
Tweets and live streams on Periscope show what appears to be hundreds of people forming a human chain in central Paris, holding placards calling for "climate justice" and to "keep it [fossil fuels] in the ground".
enltrMassive human chain in Paris for #climatejustice. No war, no warming. #COP21pic.twitter.com/Od9Osyg8sa
 - Amis de la Terre FR (@amisdelaterre) November 29, 2015
enltrTaiwan #climate youth part of thousands forming human chain in #paris#nofibs#peoplesclimate#COP21pic.twitter.com/l9uCU03MfF
 - John Englart EAM (@takvera) November 29, 2015
enltrA human chain "for peace and climate justice" Paris pic.twitter.com/g7Hw1O4A9Q
 - Antonia Juhasz (@AntoniaJuhasz) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 11.05am GMT 
 Pope Francis and UN secretary general donate shoes in Paris  
As well as the Pope, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has donated his shoes (a pair of new-looking running trainers), to the Paris shoe installation:
enltrBan Ki-moon donated his shoes to stand in solidarity w/ people of Paris unable to join a #climatemarch today. #COP21pic.twitter.com/38JGGTqvOj
 - United Nations (@UN) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 10.59am GMT 
Want to know what these marches are all about? If you can make it to London on Thursday, there's a Guardian Live event on the Paris climate summit with Australian Tim Flannery (former chief commissioner of the Climate Commission there), former UK climate diplomat John Ashton and Friends of the Earth CEO Craig Bennett. Find out more on the event listing.
Our climate talks expert, Fiona Harvey, has also written a guide on everything you need to know about the Paris summit. Or you can watch our 60-second video explainer:
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02am GMT
block-time published-time 10.45am GMT 
 Record numbers in Australia and New Zealand  
March organisers say there were at least 140,000 people marching in Australia and 33,000 in New Zealand, both of which they say are the highest ever turn-outs for climate marches in both countries. The Guardian is unable to independently verify the numbers.
block-time published-time 10.37am GMT 
Climate Home, part of the Guardian Environment Network, is in Paris this morning interviewing Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director at Avaaz, which has been heavily involved in organising the marches. You can watch the interview here:
   Emma Ruby-Sachs  
Of the shoes installation in Paris, she says:
It's kind of an incredible monument both to the voices that have been silenced but also to that hope for action that comes out of this city.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.29am GMT 
Remember, you can share your photos and videos of the marches via Guardian Witness (just click the blue button above on this blog). Here are some already submitted, from Australia to Dublin:
I marched for Laurie
Website MarchlMe matched marchers with those in Paris whose March was cancelled.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By jillfavero
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:35 
Paris - preparing for tomorrow's virtual march
Since the march has been cancelled by the French authorities in the wake of the atrocious attacks on November 13, an alternative has been found in which people can deposit shoes tomorrow morning in la place de la République, together with their messages to world leaders. The shoes will march for us in a virtual way.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By SarahMarder
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:50 
A little bit of artivism for the march tomorrow
Double-sided placard which I'm carrying at the march tomorrow, bigging up the 'keep it in the ground' campaign...
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By James Milroy
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:22 
The T-Shirts are in!
Getting ready for the Dublin Climate March on the 29th. The largest mobilisation Ireland will have ever seen!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By smartgreenliv
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 19:30 
block-time published-time 10.02am GMT 
 Corbyn to speak at London march  
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is among the public figures attending the London march later today, a spokeswoman has just confirmed to me. I'll update this post when I know exactly when and where along the march - there's a rally at 1pm at Millbank and speeches later at 2.45pm by parliament.
Corbyn's attendance looks like a last-minute decision, given his name wasn't on lists of speakers even two days ago. According to my colleague Robin McKie, he will attack the Conservative party's leadership on climate change, following a series of green policies being cancelled over the summer, saying "There are no more hugs for the husky, instead it's a passionate embrace for the carbon polluters." 
It's the first time I can think of a leading Labour politician speaking at a big climate march - the most high profile politician is usually Green party MP, Caroline Lucas.
Other speakers from 2.45pm include NUS vice-president, Piers Telemacque, and musician and activist Charlotte Church who is singing with a 12-piece choir.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.08am GMT
block-time published-time 9.43am GMT 
People are gathering in Cape Town's Keizergracht Street. The weather for the march there looks a lot better than London, where 40mph gusts are forecast this afternoon.
enltrThe #CapeClimateMarch crowds are gathering! For the love of our #CoolClimate ! #ClimateMarch#EmissionsMustFallpic.twitter.com/kVLRQ2hlw
 - Cape Climate March (@CTClimateMarch) November 29, 2015
enltrLet's ROLL team! @CTClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/HSvl4Nivpa
 - Greenpop (@GreenpopSA) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 9.34am GMT 
 Summary  
Good morning from London, where march organisers are hoping to beat the turn-out of last year's climate march which attracted around 27,000 people. The march starts at noon (local time) at Park Lane.
In Paris, as Claire pointed out, the planned march was forbidden over security fears. But thousands of shoes have been left in the Place de la Republique as an installation instead, among them a pair with Pope Francis's name on and the the inscription Laudato Si' (Praised be). 
Cardinal Turkson, seen as a potential future Pope, said: 
All members of the Catholic community are warmly invited to offer their support in prayer, word and action. And we're inviting all the bishops and priests around the world to offer the celebration of the Eucharist, on 29 November, for a responsible and successful international conference and summit. We want to encourage the faithful and many others to exercise their ecological citizenship. 
The BBC's David Shukman is at the scene in Paris:
enltrA sea of shoes in Place de la Republique in Paris: protests are banned here so you have to imagine them #COP21pic.twitter.com/AetuepjzAt
 - David Shukman (@davidshukmanbbc) November 29, 2015
Among those who are bringing their shoes is Yeb Sano, the former Philippines climate negotiator who famously broke down in tears at several summits. He's just finished a weeks-long pilgrimage from Rome to Paris for the climate talks - hence the pilgrim shoes. 
enltrPope Francis has reportedly sent his pair of shoes in solidarity with the March of Shoes in Paris tomorrow. I'll bring my pair pilgrim shoes
- Yeb Saño (@YebSano) November 28, 2015
There's also a group of indigenous people meeting in Paris for a 'healing ceremony' in solidarity with those who lost their lives in the recent terror attacks.
enltr"A moment of prayer & a peace offering" - indigenous people coming together for healing ceremony #Paris@g0ldtoothpic.twitter.com/5Ur7wkYm3I
 - 350 dot org (@350) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37am GMT
block-time published-time 9.14am GMT 
I'm now handing over the live blog to my colleague Adam Vaughan in London, who'll continue the coverage of marches across the globe today.
Thanks for reading and for all your contributions here, on Twitter and via GuardianWitness.
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
Here are some from readers across the globe:
 Bangladesh      Global Climate March - Bangladesh 
Global Climate March - Bangladesh with representation of BRIT from ACTION/2015!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By rahatulashekin
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:38 
    Kenya      The climate change March
In Nairobi Kenya the Climate Change march was very successful,we managed to spread the information to the public,we got support from 350.org which to us was a double plus,and I believe the talk in Paris will bear fruits to our planet.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By fred buluku
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:58 
    New Zealand      Young and old Takaka NZ
300 or so Golden Bay citizens marched up ( and then back down) our small main street to voice our concern about Climate Change...to a Govt that so far isn't taking much notice
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Aroha88
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:06 
block-time published-time 9.03am GMT 
Which countries are doing the most to stop global warming?
Check out how different nations compare in our interactive:
 Related:  Which countries are doing the most to stop dangerous global warming?
block-time published-time 8.47am GMT 
 Beirut march is underway  
Despite the rain, Lebanese protesters are currently marching the streets of the capital, Beirut:
enltrThe March is still going regardless of the rain #ClimateMarch#peoplesclimate@IndyACTpic.twitter.com/IeSyHxlWk7
 - Safa' Al Jayoussi (@Safaaljayoussi) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 8.25am GMT 
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
Demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes in a sign of solidarity:
enltrOur shoes will march for us. Dawn #MarcheClimat#ClimateMarch#ActInParispic.twitter.com/hSEvhzXjsc
 - Nicole Ghio (@nicoleghio) November 29, 2015
Writing in the Guardian last week, Naomi Klein argued that the banning of the Paris march was silencing the very voices that need to be heard at the climate summit:
For just two weeks every few years, the voices of the people who are getting hit first and worst get a little bit of space to be heard at the place where fateful decisions are made. That's why Pacific islanders and Inuit hunters and low-income people of colour from places like New Orleans travel for thousands of miles to attend. The expense is enormous, in both dollars and carbon, but being at the summit is a precious chance to speak about climate change in moral terms and to put a human face to this unfolding catastrophe.
Even in these rare moments, frontline voices do not have enough of a platform in the official climate meetings, in which the microphone is dominated by governments and large, well-funded green groups. The voices of ordinary people are primarily heard in grassroots gatherings parallel to the summit, as well as in marches and protests, which in turn attract media coverage.
Now the French government has decided to take away the loudest of these megaphones, claiming that securing marches would compromise its ability to secure the official summit zone where politicians will meet. 
 Related:  What's really at stake at the Paris climate conference now marches are banned | Naomi Klein
 Related:  Quel est le véritable enjeu de la conférence sur le climat de Paris maintenant que les manifestations sont interdites ?
block-time published-time 8.14am GMT 
 Summary: Australia marches for climate action  
Climate change rallies rolled on across Australia on Sunday, following well attended protests in Melbourne on Friday and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday.
On Sunday, it was the turn of Sydney, Canberra, Adelaide, Hobart and Perth.
Australia's climate-sensitive neighbours in the Pacific were a key focus for the climate change rally in Sydney, with representatives of communities from Pacific nations - including Tuvalu, Nauru, Kiribati and Tonga - prominent at the front of the march from the Domain to Circular Quay.
More than 40,000 people braved Sydney's heat for the rally on Sunday afternoon, calling on Australia to play a lead role in brokering binding emissions targets for the world to keep global temperature rise below 2C, and to commit to greater domestic emissions cuts than the 26% to 28% the government is currently proposing.
In Canberra, people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate about 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number was closer to 6,000
The Perth event started sombrely. At 3.25pm, at least 5,000 people sat in silence in Hay Street Mall to mark people who have lost their lives, homes and livelihoods to the effects of climate change. The group, in their colour blocks, had marched 2km from Wellington Square and stretched the whole 300-metre length, watched by bemused Christmas shoppers clutching plastic bags and taking photos of the crowd.
The march was led by a group from the Noongar Whadjuk nation and addressed by Christian, Islamic, Jewish, and Hindu faith leaders.
You can read the full report here:
 Related:  Climate change protests across Australia - tens of thousands march
block-time published-time 8.02am GMT 
 South Korea's climate march begins  
The Seoul march is underway, with protesters making use of some inventive props:
    Nuns holding balloons prepare to march during a rally in central Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      Participants holding umbrellas with the message "Well for us, Hell for earth" march in Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
And of course it's not just Europe that is yet to march: here's a selection of other cities that will be on the move today. Please do get in touch below the line to share details of others you know or are going to. Again, all times are local.
 Durban, South Africa 
10am at Suncoast Boulevard.
 Cape Town, South Africa 
11am from Cape Peninsula University of Technology.
 Beirut, Lebanon 
Leaving Horsh Beirut at 9am, marchers will take the Damascus Road to reach Beirut Downtown at 12.30pm.
 Kampala, Uganda 
9am from Makerere University Freedom Square.
 Seoul, South Korea 
1pm from Cheonggye Square.
 Kiev, Ukraine 
Shevchenko Park at 12.30pm.
You can find more listings here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55am GMT
block-time published-time 7.37am GMT 
 European marches on Sunday: when and where  
As Europe wakes up on Sunday morning, these are the places to keep an eye on - or head to - for climate marches today. All times are local.
 London 
Rally forming from 12 noon at Park Lane - nearest tube Hyde Park Corner & Green Park.
 Berlin 
Midday at central station.
 Madrid 
Midday at Plaza de Cibeles.
 Barcelona 
11.30am at the Via Laietana.
 Rome 
2pm at Piazza Campo de' Fiori.
 Amsterdam 
Midday at Museum Square.
 Copenhagen 
Leaving 1pm from Den Røde Plads Square in Nørrebro to march to the parliament building, Christiansborg.
 Stockholm 
1pm at Norra Latin schoolyard.
 Budapest 
Erzsébet Square at 1pm.
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
block-time published-time 7.16am GMT 
 Japanese campaigners march in Tokyo  
Japan Today reported that around 1,000 people marched in Tokyo on Saturday, but that organisers had hoped for many more:
Some demonstrators were disappointed that the number of participants was not as many as expected, with  Chigusa Okano, a 22-year-old university student in Tokyo, saying: "I especially want young people to show interest in this matter."
 Alex Brodie, a 41-year-old company worker living in Tokyo, said he finds Japanese people's lack of interest in the issue "pathetic".
"Japan needs to wake up. We need to have solar power on every roof top," he said as he marched with his wife and child, while calling on the Japanese government to push for policies to introduce more renewable energy.
The issue of clean, renewable energy has been a key one since a tsunami swamped the Fukushima nuclear plant in 2011, sending three reactors into meltdown.
"Japan must take the lead in the summit to promote renewable energy because Japan is a rare country that has experienced such a big disaster," rally organiser Daigo Ichikawa told AFP news agency.
    Environmentalists hold up placards that read "Climate Action Now!" during a rally in Tokyo on Saturday. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 6.57am GMT 
 Bangladesh march for climate justice  
AFP reports that  more than 5,000 people took part in climate marches on Saturday across 30 different locations in Bangladesh - a country on the front line of climate change, exposed to rising seas, superstorms and expanding deserts.
    People take part in the global climate march in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Saturday. Photograph: KM Asad/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
Unity is the theme of the People's Climate rally in Perth. Led by Noongar Whadjuk MCs, and kicked off with a Whadjuk dance to clear the bad spirits, the crowd then listened in silence to a multi-faith speech led by Perth Anglican assistant Bishop Tom Wilmot.
Wilmot introduced Jewish, Hindu and Sikh leaders and made a point of referring to Rateb Jneid, president of the Islamic Council of Western Australia, as his "brother in the faith", repeating: "And he is my brother."
There has been no mention of the Paris attacks, but the group of more than 1000 people, which has now left Wellington Square to march on the city, will sit for a minute's silence in Hay Street Mall to mark those who have already lost their lives, homes and livelihoods from climate-related events. In particular the minute's silence will honour those affected by bushfires, which have killed six people in Australia this November.
 Kevin Jolley, president of the firefighters' union of WA, said that anyone who had spent time on a fire line knew that the effects of man-made climate change were devastating and real. "There are no sceptics on the end of a fire hose," Jolly said. 
block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
 Philippines climate march  
Activists in the Philippines marched on Saturday, with Rappler reporting that thousands took to the streets across several cities, including the capital, Manila.
Agence France-Presse reported:
Some 3,000 people including religious clergy, students and activists marched through the Philippine capital of Manila demanding curbs on emissions to mute the impact of climate change, which is blamed for a spike in disastrous extreme weather.
"Protect our common home" and "climate justice" were written on the placards held aloft by the surging crowd.
"We want to send a message to the rest of the world, especially the world leaders at the climate talks, to say that our survival is not negotiable," said Denise Fontanilla, spokeswoman for the Asian People's Movement on Debt and Development. 
enltrPhilippines #ClimateMarch video from @inquirerdotnet@KSabilloINQhttps://t.co/jvhZrToakn#ClimateJustice
 - Airah Cadiogan (@eightyseas) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.09am GMT 
The Perth marchers are getting ready to go. (Take a look at this post to get up to speed on the colour-coding.) They have been asked to "stay classy" as they march through the city streets, Calla Wahlquist  reports.
enltrStarting to gather into colour blocks. Need a few photos to fit them all in. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/LQeKP57pLC
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.02am GMT 
 Jakarta marches for climate action  
Indonesian president Joko Widodo left Jakarta for Paris this morning. His country has pledged to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 29% by 2030.
But activists say Indonesia could be doing more to reduce its use of fossil fuels.
In September, after months of raging forest fires, Indonesia overtook China and the US to become the world's biggest climate polluter.
    Protesters participate in a climate march in Jakarta on Sunday. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters      
block-time published-time 5.47am GMT 
A reminder: you can contribute to this live blog and our other climate march coverage via GuardianWitness here or the big blue button at the top of this page.
Here are some of the pictures readers have shared so far.
 From Sydney, Australia:      The Ice Cream is Melting 
Sydney Domain, 2015, 29th Nov. Climate Change march
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Valeria Morich
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:32 
    From New Zealand:      Small-town New Zealand rises to the challenge
This parade engaged the creative spirits of a ladies knitting group, a recycle group and puppet makers to express a positive response to the challenges of climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Mairi Jay
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:15 
    From Edinburgh, Scotland:      Scotland's Climate March 28 November
Scotland's huge colourful climate march winding down the Mound
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Caitlin Hamlett
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 4:15 
    From Geneva, Switzerland:      Geneva climate march
5000 thousand people attended the climate march in Geneva this Saturday
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By yvwinteler
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:22 
    From San Luis Obispo, California, US:      Getting ready to March in San Luis Obispo California
We had about 200 people come out today to create a better world. Our Mayor, framers,and children were amongst our speaking demanding action on climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Heidi Harmon
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:44 
block-time published-time 5.33am GMT 
All roads in Sydney's CBD that were closed for the march have now reopened and there are no traffic delays reported.
Safe journey home, Sydney marchers. Keep reading the blog, though. There's plenty more to come ...
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
 Perth march begins  
Noongar Whadjuk man Noel Nannup  gives the welcome, saying: "Our planet is dying." 
Protesters say the fight for the climate can't be separated from the right of Indigenous people to country, Calla Wahlquist reports from the Perth rally.
enltrNoongar spirit dance to clear the bad spirits. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/btF1ovxCEO
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
More than 300 people are gathered in coloured clumps under the trees that line Perth's Wellington Square, ahead of the people's climate rally.
One of those is Gerard Siero, an ecological urbanism researcher at UWA (the University of Western Australia), who is wearing a yellow linen suit and leaning against his folding bike, which collapsed down to a 10kg stick for ease of commuting. He's marching for the solutions to climate change.
"We have all the solutions we need to solve the problem," Siero said. "We don't have the will on behalf of our politicians, but we have the will on behalf of the people.
"What we are really trying to march with today is to let the politicians know that they have to get out of the way."
Siero said Australia had the capacity and technology to switch off carbon, but it was fast running out of time. "We're at the point where if we don't so something it will be too late to do anything but get out the ambulances," he said.
block-time published-time 4.57am GMT 
 Sydney lord mayor: 'at least 45,000 marchers'  
 Clover Moore, Sydney's lord mayor, says these numbers would make today the biggest climate march ever held in the city :
enltrI've just been told by organisers there were at least 45,000 people, making it the biggest climate march ever in Sydney #PeoplesClimate
 - Clover Moore (@CloverMoore) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.49am GMT 
My colleague Calla Wahlquist  is in Perth, where marchers will be setting off in later today:
enltrMore than 100 people have already gathered at Wellington Square, clinging to the shade on the fringe. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Lu9BkNIvtm
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
We'll be following the progress of that march once it gets underway too, plus you can keep an eye on updates @callapilla.
block-time published-time 4.41am GMT 
With the march in Paris - host of the COP21 climate summit - cancelled after the terrorist attacks of 13 November, activists have turned to other ways of showing their support for the global climate march, Reuters reports:
Activists plan to join arms and form a "human chain" in Paris on Sunday to urge action on global warming, in a muted rally after attacks on the city by Islamic State. 
More than 2,000 climate events are planned in cities including Sydney, Jakarta, Berlin, London, Sao Paulo and New York, making it one of the biggest days of action on climate change in history, organisers say. 
Activists in France scaled back their plans when the government imposed a state of emergency after the attacks two weeks ago killed 130 people, banning the planned demonstration in Paris, meant as the biggest of all. 
In France, activists plan to form a static human chain, formed by about 3,400 people joining arms along what had been the original 3km (1.9 miles) route through central Paris from the Place de la Republique to Place de la Nation. 
"This is a moment for the whole world to join hands," said Iain Keith, campaign director for Avaaz, one of the organisers. 
Separately, more than 10,000 demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes to form a big pile in a sign of solidarity. Organisers said the Vatican even sent a pair to represent Pope Francis. 
     Shoes are symbolically placed on a sidewalk in Paris near the Place de la Republique. Photograph: Eric Gaillard/Reuters    
 Alix Mazounie of French Climate Action Network said the activists reckoned a human chain would not violate the state of emergency. 
"This is not civil disobedience," she said. The chain would break, for instance, wherever it crossed a road to avoid disrupting traffic. 
But, underscoring security worries, France put 24 green activists under house arrest before the summit, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve said on Saturday, saying they were suspected of planning violent protests at the talks. 
Foreign minister  Laurent Fabius welcomed the worldwide demonstrations. "It is very positive," Fabius said, for governments to feel public pressure to act.
block-time published-time 4.22am GMT 
While Australian PM  Malcolm Turnbull  heads to Paris for the climate summit, Puppet Malcolm decided to take a turn in the Sydney march:
    A giant Malcolm Turnbull puppet joins tens of thousands of marchers in Sydney's Domain as part of the global people's climate march on Sunday 29 November 2015. Photograph: Janine Israel/Guardian   
And it seems he brought an old, um, pal with him:
undltr @GuardianAuspic.twitter.com/BrQ359YOUn
 - Susan Mackay (@mackaysuzie) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.08am GMT 
The Sydney march is well and truly on the move, reports Ben Doherty :
Playing 'Hot, Hot, Hot' as they march down Macquarie St towards the Opera House. Jubilant, boisterous mood.
     Sydney protesters march down Macquarie St in the people's climate march. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 4.05am GMT 
The Canberra march has wrapped up without incident, and ACT Policing has issued Guardian Australia with this statement from operation commander Jo Cameron :
There was a large, well-behaved crowd and it was a peaceful event. There were no arrests and no incidents.
There were some road closures during the march, which were opened as soon as possible.
As you were, Canberra. Carry on with your weekend.
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
My colleague Janine Israel has also been at the Sydney rally, and reports that many Islander and Indigenous communities are represented at the march.
She spoke to members of Australia's Tongan community. One protester told her:
Our islands are drowning. Where are we going to go?
     Members of Australia's Tongan community at the Sydney people's climate march. Photograph: Janine Israel for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.43am GMT 
 What are Australia's climate targets?  
Australia's prime minister,  Malcolm Turnbull, will arrive in Paris later tonight for key international climate talks, armed with a climate target that's lower than many other developed countries.
The Australian government has committed to cutting emissions by 26%-28% of 2005 levels by 2030.
By comparison, the United States has vowed to cut emissions by 26%-28% too - but five years earlier than Australia, by 2025.
Canada has committed to a 30% cut and so has New Zealand, while the European Union has vowed to reduce emissions by 40% of 1990 levels by 2030.
The Labor party released its own targets on Friday. It wants a 45% cut by 2030, a figure Turnbull has criticised as "heroic" and expensive.
But modelling by leading economist Warwick McKibbon, did not find a large difference in the economic impacts of the targets. A reduction of 26% would shave between 0.2% and 0.3% of the GDP, while a 45% reduction would see between 0.5% and 0.7% lost. 
block-time published-time 3.32am GMT 
Helpful reminder for those marching in Sydney right now:
enltrQuick PSA for Sydney: there are water stations dotted around. You should drink some #climatemarch#peopleclimatepic.twitter.com/JC6NySchf8
 - GetUp! (@GetUp) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
The crowds in Sydney have observed one minute's silence to reflect upon those most affected by climate change, ended by the sounding of a didgeridoo.
Many of those there are saying that the Domain - no small space - is almost full to capacity.
Once the speeches and songs are finished, the rally is set to march through the streets of Sydney in colour-coordinated blocks:
yellow for "solutions", eg renewables.
orange for "just transitions", advocating for fair jobs.
red to stand with those already on the front line of climate change.
purple for diversity of faith and cultures.
blue to represent future generations.
white for those in healthcare and science.
blue to stand up for threatened ecosystems.
and a group marching for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The crowd listen to speeches at the Domain in Sydney, Australia, on 29 November 2015 as part of global climate marches in the lead-up to COP 21 in Paris. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian
block-time published-time 3.10am GMT 
Although it is very hot in Sydney today, with protesters - those who weren't canny enough to bring their umbrellas - seeking out whatever shade they can find, activists are well aware that the real front line against climate change lies further west, in the Pacific islands.
A good primer on that situation is this report by my colleague Oliver Milman :
The cause for concern is clear - Nasa recently reported the world's sea level has risen nearly 8cm since 1992, with the Pacific experiencing a more rapid increase than other oceans.
A rise of around a metre by the end of the century now looks likely. For low-lying islands in the Pacific, this means coastal erosion, saltwater seeping into precious rainwater catchments and ruined crops.
Meanwhile, rising temperatures will heighten the risk of diseases, including those carried by mosquitos. Cyclones are expected to become more severe. The World Health Organisation estimates climate change will cause around 250,000 deaths globally between 2030 and 2050. 
     Pacific Islands will be on the 'frontline' of climate change, the Sydney climate change march is told. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.03am GMT 
My colleague  Ben Doherty is in Sydney's Domain, sheltering from the sun and hearing from Professor Tim Flannery, one of Australia's leading climate change activists, who says today "looks like the largest climate march ever in Australia ".
The Paris talks, he said, are the last chance to save "many things we care about, like the Great Barrier Reef ... We are coming to this issue very late."
There are no easy fixes to the climate problem, he warned, but Australia needs to close down polluting industries and dependence on fossil fuels:
We are meeting in the home city of the Australian prime minister. We need to send a very powerful message to him: do what the people demand.
He said the Australian people would not accept anything less than a successful outcome at Paris. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
It was a very peaceful, family-oriented affair in Canberra, as people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate around 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number is closer to 6,000. Canberrans are fairly cautious about protesting, as many are public servants and are often reluctant to make political statements.
One of the coordinators of the event, Emma Robinson from the Conservation Council, said she was not surprised that so many showed up in the capital.
"Climate change is and has always been everyone's business," she said. 
The event was staffed by about 80 volunteers, most of whom are Canberra locals who are part of the Conservation Council.
Former chief scientist of Australia, Penny Sackett, said that protests like Sunday's make people feel as though they are taking action on climate change.
"People can become discouraged because it appears as though [political] change does not happen swiftly enough," she told Guardian Australia.
 She said the march was a message from voters to world leaders who are about to meet on climate change in Paris: "We're watching." 
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
The Canberra Times now estimates there are more than 5,000 people taking part in the march there.
enltrThis gives you a better ideas of the numbers marching down from Parliament House, #Canberra. #peoplesclimate#cbrpic.twitter.com/6aNEeVMYVQ
 - Richard Tuffin (@RichardTuffin) November 29, 2015
Attendance numbers are always a tricky thing with marches, with totals from organisers and police often varying wildly.
Police estimates for Melbourne, for example, put the crowd numbers by the end of Friday night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out.
Similarly, estimates for Brisbane on Saturday came in at between 5,000 and 10,000.
We're yet to hear estimates for the Sydney crowd but organisers already seem overwhelmed by the numbers who have shown up so far.
block-time published-time 2.38am GMT 
An enterprising cyclist at the Adelaide rally:
    A cyclist wears a helmet with a solar panel attached as he participates in a march along the main street of Adelaide. Photograph: David Gray/Reuters   
Meanwhile, some Sydney marchers seek out the shade:
enltrToo hot out in the middle! #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Y7ejzXipdt
 - Paddy Manning (@gpaddymanning) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
 Sydney is go!  
The Sydney rally is underway, with thousands already in attendance and many more still arriving:
enltrThe power is ours! Yehhhh Sydney! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/BqqlzByULb
 - Greenpeace Aus Pac (@GreenpeaceAustP) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge #greens turnout for #PeoplesClimate !! Rally starting now. pic.twitter.com/laNbMg50Y4
 - Greens NSW (@GreensNSW) November 29, 2015
 Ben Doherty is now in the Domain, from where the march is leaving, and reports "massive numbers":
Much more multi-coloured than the Hyde Park beginnings, people in all manner of colours, lots of associated causes: anti-nuclear, church groups, refugee groups.
One guy has a mallard on his head, and a tree growing out of his backpack.
Sydney lord mayor Clover Moore tells the crowd that COP21 in Paris will be the most important meeting of our lifetime.
"On it depends the future of our planet," she says.
block-time published-time 2.18am GMT 
Hello Hobart! Tasmanian marchers are also assembling, with a minute's silence for Paris, which is hosting this week's climate talks, but - after the terrorist attacks of 13 November - will not be holding its own climate march:
enltrA min of silence for #Paris & imagining a clean, compassionate future in #Hobart at #peoplesclimate march #cop21pic.twitter.com/p57G5JG1Yz
 - Claire Havens (@ClaireHavens) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.07am GMT 
My colleague Ben Doherty is with the Sydney marchers and sends this dispatch from the start line:
 At the Sydney march, there are red shirts everywhere. Solid, if not yet spectacular numbers are gathering at the north end of Hyde Park, and marching into the Domain in bright sunshine. 
Labor deputy leader Tanya Plibersek, who brought her own phalanx of rosily-attired Young Laborites, gave a rangy press conference at which she rejected the 'heroic' label Malcolm Turnbull  affixed to Labor's emissions targets (it wasn't meant as a compliment, Plibersek seems to suspect).
She condemned Turnbull for "stopping off on the way to Paris to lecture other heads of government to do more on climate change, while he is doing less".
Plibersek said Labor's targets would require significant change in Australia, but that the country had already seen, and embraced, change aimed at reducing emissions.
She said the $1m Australia has offered to contribute to the Commonwealth's new Climate Finance Access Hub (established at the CHOGM meeting in Valetta) was "pathetically puny".
The hub will be set up to help small island nations vulnerable to climate change access global funds for mitigation and adaptation.
Plibersek said Australia, given its role as a leader in the Pacific region, needed to do more to help its neighbours, some of whom face "an existential threat" from climate change.
 Related:  Turnbull says Shorten's 'heroic' climate target aimed at making political point
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08am GMT
block-time published-time 2.02am GMT 
Sydney marchers are also warming up - as is the weather, with that blue sky deciding to put in an appearance after all - and is expected to be the biggest Australian march of the day. Will NSW be able to best Melbourne's 40,000+ from Friday ?
Reader Tim Senior and friends are well stocked with placards for the Sydney rally:
enltrOn our way to the #peoplesclimate#climatemarch. On public transport of course! pic.twitter.com/FMs5JiOPXZ
 - Tim Senior (@timsenior) November 29, 2015
A reminder: do keep your pictures, videos, thoughts and headcounts coming, to me directly @Claire_Phipps or via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of the blog. Thank you!
block-time published-time 1.53am GMT 
My colleague Shalailah Medhora is at the Canberra march, which has just started. She estimates there are around 3,000 people there so far:
enltrAnd they're off! Around 3,000 on the march to the tent embassy. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/Def0zmsbqz
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
enltr"There are no climate sceptics at the end of a hose". ACT firefighters union at climate rally. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/HYP0ASWQoC
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
I'll be tracking the progress of the Canberra march - along with the others today - on this live blog, plus you can keep an eye on it via @shalailah.
block-time published-time 1.40am GMT 
Many thousands of people marched in New Zealand on Saturday, with more events today: check here for those listings.
An estimated 7,000 turned out in Wellington:
enltr @Claire_Phipps we had a fantastic turn out in Wellington yesterday! #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/rFlsGye4YB
 - Torken Faddy (@TFaddy) November 29, 2015
And there were around 15,000 marchers in Auckland, with 8,000 more in Christchurch:
    Protesters of all ages marched in Christchurch, New Zealand, on Saturday. Photograph: PJ Heller/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 What is likely to be agreed in Paris?  
We know already what the biggest emitters have committed to:
The EU will cut its emissions by 40%, compared with 1990 levels, by 2030.
The US will cut its emissions by 26% to 28%, compared with 2005 levels, by 2025.
China will agree that its emissions will peak by 2030.
Nations responsible for more than 90% of global emissions have now come up with their targets - known in the UN jargon as intended nationally determined contributions, or INDCs.
These include all of the major developed and developing countries, though their contributions vary: in the case of developed countries, actual cuts in emissions, but for developing countries a range of targets including limits on emissions compared to "business as usual", and pledges to increase low-carbon energy or preserve forests.
Analysis of the INDCS, endorsed by the UN, has suggested that these pledges are enough to hold the world to about 2.7C or 3C of warming. That is not quite enough to meet the scientific advice.
However, that is not the end of the story. One of the key components of any Paris agreement would be to institute a system of review of the emissions targets every five years, with a view to ratcheting them upwards.
Another, and complementary, approach is to make more effort to bring down emissions outside the UN process, for instance by engaging "non-state actors" such as cities, local governments and businesses to do more.
block-time published-time 1.27am GMT 
 Canberra march gets started  
It's Canberra's turn now, and again it looks to be a very healthy turnout under a beautiful blue sky (it's rather grey here in Sydney, not that that should put anyone off):
enltr #peoplesclimate March kicking off in Canberra! pic.twitter.com/d11z8jJYC6
 - Fair Go For Canberra (@FairGoCanberra) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 1.13am GMT 
 Adelaide march begins  
The Adelaide rally is underway and it's a good turnout, estimated in the thousands:
enltrOver 5000 in #Adelaide marching for jobs, justice & a safe #climate ! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/bn7LsXdm4f
 - AYCC (@AYCC) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge turnout for the #adelaide#peoplesclimate march pic.twitter.com/5eD9KDQWIX
 - Michael Garrod (@MickyJim74) November 29, 2015
enltrMarching for our planet! #climatemarch#adelaide#climatechange#peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/IPVvmxVTcz
 - Mike Crowhurst (@TheCunningCrow) November 29, 2015
A reminder: you can contribute your own pictures and videos via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of this live blog, and/or to me @Claire_Phipps.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.13am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
Avaaz, the campaign group behind the march, says more than 120,000 people have already taken part - with thousands of rallies yet to take place on Sunday, the main day of action. 
Thousands of people marched in Brisbane on Saturday - organisers put it at 10,000 - and more in Darwin, following Friday's 40,000-strong rally in Melbourne. 
Organisers said thousands took part in 35 New Zealand locations - the smallest being on Raoul Island, where the island's entire population of seven turned out.
My colleague Melissa Davey was at the Melbourne march on Friday evening and sent this report:
Thousands of people were marching through Melbourne's CBD on Friday evening in what is expected to the largest in a series of climate change protests being held throughout Australia over the weekend.
They gathered in front of the state library and, as the lawns filled with protesters putting finishing touches on their placards, they took to the surrounding roads just in time for peak hour.
Environmentalists, unionists, religious organisations, youth groups, doctors, Indigenous organisations, and people from the aid and development sector were part of the crowd. Police estimates put the crowd numbers by the end of the night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out for the event.
 Related:  Victorians take to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change
block-time published-time 12.56am GMT 
 Why Paris, why now?  
After the terrorist attacks of 13 November, the meeting of world leaders in the French capital beginning on Monday has an added poignancy.
But the COP 21 talks - it stands for conference of the parties, the yearly United Nations climate change conference; this is the 21st - will focus on hammering out a new global agreement to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and with them the threat of climate change.
Here are a couple of key questions answered by the Guardian's environment reporter Fiona Harvey :
 Why now? 
Current commitments on greenhouse gas emissions run out in 2020, so at Paris governments are expected to produce an agreement on what happens for the decade after that at least, and potentially beyond.
 Why is this important? 
Scientists have warned that if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, we will pass the threshold beyond which global warming becomes catastrophic and irreversible. That threshold is estimated as a temperature rise of 2C above pre-industrial levels, and on current emissions trajectories we are heading for a rise of about 5C.
That may not sound like much, but the temperature difference between today's world and the last ice age was about 5C, so seemingly small changes in temperature can mean big differences for the Earth.
 Will world leaders go to Paris? 
Yes. The heads of state or government of more than 130 countries have already said they will come. These include French president Francois Hollande, Barack Obama of the US, Xi Jinping of China, Narendra Modi of India, Angela Merkel  of Germany, Australia's Malcolm Turnbull, John Key of New Zealand and David Cameron of the UK.
Unlike the Copenhagen talks in 2009, however, at which world leaders turned up at the last minute of the two weeks of talks, this time the leaders will arrive at the beginning of the conference, give their negotiating teams clear instructions, and expect a fully formed agreement at the end of it.
 Related:  Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
block-time published-time 12.48am GMT 
 Marches in Australia  
Some Australian cities have already met and marched, with Melbourne getting in first on Friday evening, and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday. I'll have reports and pictures from those marches on this live blog shortly, along with news from New Zealand, which held most of its events on Saturday too.
Here's the line-up for today:
 Adelaide : Action started from 11am local (11.30am AEDT) at Ester Lipman Gardens, adjacent to the Torrens Parade Ground. 
 Canberra:  Speakers from 12 midday at Parliament Lawns before the march to the Tent Embassy grounds and West Lawns.
 Sydney : Marchers are asked to gather at 12.30 for a 1pm start from the Domain.
 Hobart : March begins at 1pm from Parliament Lawns.
 Perth : Another 1pm start (4pm AEDT), from Wellington Square.
Plus a heap of other marches - if one can heap a march - in other towns and cities: check out the list on the People's Climate March website. 
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Welcome to live coverage of the global climate march - a continent-spanning series of rallies which organisers hope will see millions of people join to highlight the need for a worldwide consensus on tackling climate change ahead of the COP21 talks in Paris, which open tomorrow.
I'll be kicking off this live blog from Sydney, handing over later to colleagues in London and New York, and aiming to bring you updates from marches in all those places and everywhere in between.
Last year, tens of thousands of people demonstrated in London, Paris, Berlin and Brussels; thousands more turned out in Sydney and Brisbane, with 30,000 thronging the streets of Melbourne. In New York, more than 300,000 marchers took part, on a day of 2,700 simultaneous climate events worldwide.
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
If you're taking part in the marches and want to share a story, an observation, a pun or a picture, please do get in touch below the line or give me a shout on Twitter @Claire_Phipps. I'll tweet key developments from there too.
You can also share your pictures and videos of the march via GuardianWitness here or the blue button at the top of the blog, just up there.

Load-Date: November 29, 2015


End of Document




On the climate change frontline: the disappearing fishing villages of Bangladesh; Kutubdia's islanders don't have much of a carbon footprint - most don't have regular electricity. But they are facing the reality of a changing climate, and soon tens of millions of their fellow Bangladeshis will be at risk
The Guardian
January 20, 2017 Friday 12:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT
Length: 1428 words
Byline: Karen McVeigh in Kutubdia, Bangladesh
Body


A row of mangrove trees sticking out of the sand, exposed by low tide off Kutubdia island in the Bay of Bengal, is all that remains of a coastal village that for generations was home to 250 families. The villagers were forced to flee as their land, which had been slowly eroding for decades, was finally engulfed by the ever-rising tide five years ago.
For the  embattled people of Ali Akbar Dial, a collection of disappearing villages on the southern tip of the island in Bangladesh, the distant trees serve as a bittersweet reminder of what they have lost and a warning of what is come. The low-lying island of Kutubdia has one of the fastest-ever sea level rises recorded in the world, placing it bang on the front line of climate change, and the islanders are fighting a battle they fear is already lost.
"I was born there, so were my parents and grandparents," said Onu Das, 25, standing on a sandy coastal path atop a concrete embankment, pointing to a forest of mangroves. "There were mango, betel nut and coconut trees. Now we are landless and it is very difficult. We do not get food regularly. We fish. Somehow we are trying to survive."
"The ocean is torturing us," said Pushpo Rani Das, 28, a mother of three who has had to move her home four times to escape storm surges. "We can't stop it. Water enters my house in every high tide, especially in the rainy season."
Rani fears that soon her family will have to leave the island altogether. A 100 yards from where she lives, a half-built brick mosque lies abandoned, its cement foundations washed away.
UN scientists predict some of the worst impacts of climate change will occur in south-east Asia, and that more than 25 million people in Bangladesh will be at risk from sea level rise by 2050. It is well known that many of the countries most vulnerable to climate change are among those who contribute to it the least, and here that's certainly true. The carbon footprint of Kutubdia's 100,000 islanders is small - most do not even have access to a regular electricity supply. But they fear that for them, time is already running out.
Tides that once stopped short of the three-metre-high concrete embankment, built by the government to protect the island, now flood over it and the embankment is damaged in many places. While no scientific monitoring is done here, sea level rise of 8mm a year over 20 years has been recorded at Cox's Bazar, 50 miles away on the mainland. This is nearly three times the level for Bangladesh as a whole and up to five times the world average.
So far, members of the fishing community of Ali Akbar Dail, perched precariously on a strip of coast next to the embankment, have learned to adapt to the many natural disasters thrown at them. When the cyclones hit, they hoist their children on to their shoulders and head for the network of cyclone shelters, which, along with the country's early warning system, have dramatically reduced fatalities. 
However, after a year that they say has brought more - and more powerful - storms than before, the fishermen are engaged in a battle for survival against their only asset: the ocean.
They say the climate is changing too fast for them to adapt. "For me, it is the increase in signals [storm warnings], that they are coming in winter," said Jogot Hari Jala Das, 70, a village elder, squinting against the hot sun. "It is hot now and it is supposed to be winter."
The fishermen no longer fish in the shallow waters around the island because of a decrease in catches, which they believe is linked to the water warming, Hari said. Now, they travel 10 to 15 hours to the deep sea. But this year, they have seen an increase in signals, forcing them back to land and cutting their earnings further.
"Around 15 to 20 years back, signals were not as frequent as they are now," Hari said. "When the signal comes you can't go to the deep sea because it could change at any time."
Asked what they would do if they could not fish, Hari laughed. "We can't do anything. When we catch fish, we eat. Our only asset is the ocean."
It is a dangerous life. Last month, 89 fishermen who left for the deep sea did not return. 
In Cox's Bazar, meteorologists confirmed the fishermen's observations. Last year, there were four cyclones - Roanu, Kyant, Nada and Vardah - in the Bay of Bengal. Usually there is only one.
Nazmul Huque, an assistant meteorologist, said: "This year, the quantity of signals was more than any other year in the Bay of Bengal. Two or three depressions occur normally, but this year there were seven or eight, and four cyclones."
Huque also confirmed a change in the pattern of the seasons. The monsoon, which runs from June to October, began later last year, he said, and the year before. "We see the pattern changing," said Huque. "But I'm not a researcher and this is a subject that needs research. Whether it is climate change, I'm not sure."
Scientists say the sinking of islands in the Bay in Bengal is due to natural and possibly manmade climate change. Erosion linked to storm surges, for instance, predate global warming. But sea surface temperatures, linked to sea level rise, have risen in the Bay of Bengal. In a report published last month, scientists said they believed the higher surface temperatures in the Indian Ocean were causing cyclones to increase their frequency and intensity. 
Moqbul Ahmed, project coordinator of Coast, an organisation working with climate-affected communities and migrants on Kutubdia and elsewhere, believes the villagers are victims of climate change. 
"High tides never used to enter the villages before," said Ahmed. "One portion of the island has already been washed away. I'm quite convinced it is happening because of climate change.
"There are too many challenges. People are losing their ancestral land, and they are having to migrate to other places. There, they have to adapt to a new environment. There are families from Kutubdia who were once rich, with land and cows and boats, and now are living in slums and are beggars. There is no money for the migrated people and no government policy to help them."
Tens of thousands of islanders from Kutubdia have already fled to the mainland, many of them resettled by the government after 20 villages were swamped when a massive cyclone hit the island in 1991.
Most live in makeshift corrugated iron and bamboo huts in a shanty town called Kutubdia para (meaning "neighbourhood"), behind the airport in Cox's Bazar, the longest stretch of sandy beach in the world and a popular resort for middle-class Bangladeshi tourists. But they, too, are anxious and uncertain about the future. The local government wants them to move elsewhere so it can build a bigger airport to service the growing tourist industry.
Outside the shanty town's primary school, where children are learning English, Didarul Islam Rubel 29, spoke of his father's heartbreak on leaving the island with nothing. 
"My father had four fishing boats but he lost most of [them] and a lot of land during the 1991 cyclone," said Islam. "He had to go back to being a day labourer and fish with nets. It was a huge shift. My father's generation lost their way of life. If the government drive us out, another generation will lose theirs."
The question of whether the weather extremes in Bangladesh are down to climate change is difficult to answer: more difficult still is whether those who have lost land like those in Kutubdia can be deemed climate change or environment migrants.
 Related:  Sea change: the Bay of Bengal's vanishing islands | John Vidal
Saleemul Huq, the director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development and a senior fellow of the International Institute for Environment and Development, said: "You can't ignore the fact that what climate change will do is exacerbate what is happening. Erosion because of storm surges precedes climate change. But if people are talking about king tides and queen tides getting bigger, and observing that it is getting worse, then you shouldn't discount it. Our former environment minister, who is from Chittagong, has talked about it."
Huq said the term "climate change refugee or migrant" was disputed, because it is very difficult to disentangle the reasons why someone might migrate. "But you can make a very strong prediction: that tens of millions of people living in coastal areas of Bangladesh will definitely have to move because they will be unable to pursue the livelihoods that their forefathers have done.
"Climate change migration is an issue of the future that we will have to think about and plan for."

Load-Date: January 20, 2017


End of Document




Mary Robinson: international law is coming up short in its response to climate change; Climate justice requires solidarity between nations. The law can help promote change, but it is up to us all to acknowledge our responsibilities
The Guardian
January 9, 2015 Friday 9:38 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 784 words
Byline: Mary Robinson
Body


When it comes to human suffering, the IPCC doesn't mince its words. According to its latest report - the culmination of seven years of research and intense negotiations - climate change is on its way to causing "severe, pervasive and irreversible" damage on the world's people, cultures, ecosystems and economies.
The report identifies a series of imminent risks, including illness, the breakdown of infrastructure and public services, food and water insecurity, and loss of rural livelihoods.
The human cost of global warming has a name: climate injustice. The remedy, then, is climate justice. Climate justice is not just the recognition that climate change is a matter of human rights and development; it also involves recognising that the victims of global warming are not responsible for it, nor can their actions alone halt it.
Take the Maldives islands in the Indian Ocean, coral atolls vulnerable to rising sea levels. In 2009, the country's leaders and its people showed extraordinary foresight and courage as they embarked on a plan to become carbon neutral by 2020. But they cannot do it alone, they need the rest of the world to support them to achieve this goal.
Solidarity is at the core of climate justice. It is about sharing the benefits and burdens of climate change - and our response to it - fairly, making sure that the 1.3 billion people living without access to electricity and the 2.7 billion relying on biomass for cooking reap the benefits of access to clean, sustainable energy.
Climate justice also means sharing responsibility. Those most responsible must take the lead and show greatest ambition in their domestic climate actions and support for vulnerable countries. As we make the transition to a carbon neutral world, we should all participate in the decisions taken along the way. This is the challenge of climate justice, finding fair solutions to a global problem.
The concept of climate justice has an advocate in one of the world's leading legal organisations. The International Bar Association (IBA), the global voice of the legal profession, has released a detailed report on the role of international law in addressing climate change (pdf). Its assessment is frankly shocking. It finds that climate change touches on every area of international law - human rights, trade, investment, migration - and everywhere the law is coming up short.
Yet the report is also full of hope. The authors, a group of eminent lawyers from around the world, looked hard at the international legal system and found that more effective and coherent use of existing laws, rules and norms would inform better climate responses at the international and national level. The report is also full of practical and realistic suggestions for reform, from sharpening state obligations under international human rights law to getting the World Trade Organisation to state clearly and publicly that trade policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gases do not fall foul of the rules.
Of particular interest is the report's strong call for better human rights protections for the victims of climate change. States must take into account the fact that carbon emissions cost lives. Likewise, I back the report's call for nations to have the courage to prepare the ground for a legally-binding commitment on climate change which will address not just climate change but climate justice.
The IBA's backing for climate justice is pivotal, but we cannot leave climate justice to the lawyers. Climate justice is about all of us. It is about acknowledging our personal responsibility in an interconnected world. It is about acting outside the narrow confines of self-interest - even as it becomes clear that our self-interest can destroy the lives of our own children and grandchildren.
The IBA report is not the last word on climate justice, but it is an important and credible voice. It is a clarion call, and a sign that the word is spreading. The only solutions to climate change are fair solutions that protect human rights and uphold the rule of law.
                     Mary Robinson is the former president of Ireland and chair of the                                            Mary Robinson Foundation - Climate Justice                                        
                     Read more stories like this:                   
· Lord Stern: global warming may create billions of climate refugees
· Ebola is a product of a destructive and exploitative global economic system
· 8 institutional innovations that could update the economic system
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.                   

Load-Date: January 9, 2015


End of Document




Mary Robinson: International law is coming up short in its response to climate change; Climate justice requires solidarity between nations. The law can help promote change, but it is up to us all to acknowledge our responsibilities
The Guardian
January 9, 2015 Friday 7:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 784 words
Byline: Mary Robinson
Body


When it comes to human suffering, the IPCC doesn't mince its words. According to its latest report - the culmination of seven years of research and intense negotiations - climate change is on its way to causing "severe, pervasive and irreversible" damage on the world's people, cultures, ecosystems and economies.
The report identifies a series of imminent risks, including illness, the breakdown of infrastructure and public services, food and water insecurity, and loss of rural livelihoods.
The human cost of global warming has a name: climate injustice. The remedy, then, is climate justice. Climate justice is not just the recognition that climate change is a matter of human rights and development; it also involves recognising that the victims of global warming are not responsible for it, nor can their actions alone halt it.
Take the Maldives islands in the Indian Ocean, coral atolls vulnerable to rising sea levels. In 2009, the country's leaders and its people showed extraordinary foresight and courage as they embarked on a plan to become carbon neutral by 2020. But they cannot do it alone, they need the rest of the world to support them to achieve this goal.
Solidarity is at the core of climate justice. It is about sharing the benefits and burdens of climate change - and our response to it - fairly, making sure that the 1.3 billion people living without access to electricity and the 2.7 billion relying on biomass for cooking reap the benefits of access to clean, sustainable energy.
Climate justice also means sharing responsibility. Those most responsible must take the lead and show greatest ambition in their domestic climate actions and support for vulnerable countries. As we make the transition to a carbon neutral world, we should all participate in the decisions taken along the way. This is the challenge of climate justice, finding fair solutions to a global problem.
The concept of climate justice has an advocate in one of the world's leading legal organisations. The International Bar Association (IBA), the global voice of the legal profession, has released a detailed report on the role of international law in addressing climate change (pdf). Its assessment is frankly shocking. It finds that climate change touches on every area of international law - human rights, trade, investment, migration - and everywhere the law is coming up short.
Yet the report is also full of hope. The authors, a group of eminent lawyers from around the world, looked hard at the international legal system and found that more effective and coherent use of existing laws, rules and norms would inform better climate responses at the international and national level. The report is also full of practical and realistic suggestions for reform, from sharpening state obligations under international human rights law to getting the World Trade Organisation to state clearly and publicly that trade policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gases do not fall foul of the rules.
Of particular interest is the report's strong call for better human rights protections for the victims of climate change. States must take into account the fact that carbon emissions cost lives. Likewise, I back the report's call for nations to have the courage to prepare the ground for a legally-binding commitment on climate change which will address not just climate change but climate justice.
The IBA's backing for climate justice is pivotal, but we cannot leave climate justice to the lawyers. Climate justice is about all of us. It is about acknowledging our personal responsibility in an interconnected world. It is about acting outside the narrow confines of self-interest - even as it becomes clear that our self-interest can destroy the lives of our own children and grandchildren.
The IBA report is not the last word on climate justice, but it is an important and credible voice. It is a clarion call, and a sign that the word is spreading. The only solutions to climate change are fair solutions that protect human rights and uphold the rule of law.
                     Mary Robinson is the former president of Ireland and chair of the                                            Mary Robinson Foundation - Climate Justice                                        
                     Read more stories like this:                   
· Lord Stern: global warming may create billions of climate refugees
· Ebola is a product of a destructive and exploitative global economic system
· 8 institutional innovations that could update the economic system
                     Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.                   

Load-Date: January 9, 2015


End of Document




Global climate march 2015: Jeremy Corbyn to join thousands on Europe marches - live; Millions expected to take to streets ahead of Paris climate summit Sydney to Seattle, via Hong Kong, Berlin, London and Sao Paulo, march on SundayClimate change protests take place across Australia Keep it in the ground: the Guardian's climate change campaignInteractive: why we are joining the global climate march
The Guardian
November 29, 2015 Sunday 12:08 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 9075 words
Byline: Claire Phipps in Sydney, Adam Vaughan in London
Body


block-time published-time 12.03pm GMT 
 Addressing inequality essential for tackling climate change, Corbyn to say  
Here's an excerpt of what Corbyn is expected to say in around half an hour's time:
The greener world I know is possible is a more just, a more equal, and a more productive world
To tackle climate change, we must tackle global inequality, we must show that defeating the menace of global warming will not only improve the prospects of our children and grandchildren, but will improve lives here and now 
Britain should be at the forefront of that argument, leading global efforts to a political solution to climate change at the Paris conference. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.59am GMT 
People have marched across Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, in Yemen, Tanzania, Singapore, South Africa and Benin among many other countries.
Around 70 people reportedly turned up in Sanaa in Yemen, despite reported bombing by airplanes just a few miles away.
Walid Yehia Hassan Al-Hashef, an Avaaz member in Sanaa has written in to say: 
Airstrike targets crowds of people and today early morning an airstrike hit around 4km from our protest location. We expected 150 people because of the airstrike only around 70 people showed up.
Yes, I have a message to every human being on our planet... In Yemen we are peaceful people we do not have place in our behaviors or culture for terror. We in Yemen love all people christians, jews, muslims and others.
     Yemen climate change protest on 29 November 2015. Photograph: Avaaz     
undltr #UNVolunteers#actioncounts#MarcheClimat#COP21pic.twitter.com/KqFIX8O7Vq
 - UN Benin (@UNBenin) November 29, 2015Singapore sends its love to Paris as a Green Heart
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By autumnclean
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 9:43 
Marches are getting underway in Berlin and Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam is raring to go!! 
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By guardianUser11784703
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:51 
Climate Change March begins outside Berlin HBF
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Amy Newiss
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 11:17 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.45am GMT 
 Latvian president: deal in Paris 'quite close'  
 Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis, Europe's first Green party head of state, tells Reuters that because most countries have already submitted their climate plans, a deal in Paris in two weeks' time is close. 
"...We are quite close to... an accord and a new Kyoto agreement, which would be a Paris agreement, hopefully will be reached," he said in reference to the 1997 Kyoto protocol, the only previous legally-binding international climate treaty.
Vejonis also said he hoped all leaders would agree on a "legally-binding document" in Paris, apparently putting him at odds with the US, which has made clear it does not want a treaty.
block-time published-time 11.34am GMT 
In case you were wondering (like me) what was going to happen to all the shoes in Place de la Republique, Avaaz tells me that they are being given to a social enterprise called Relais 75 Emmaus that works with homeless people.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am GMT
block-time published-time 11.26am GMT 
 Maurice Strong has died  
Tributes have been paid to Maurice Strong, the first executive director at the UN environment programme (Unep), who has died aged 86. He was also the secretary general at the Stockholm environment meeting in 1972 and Rio Earth Summit in 1992, which paved the way for the Paris climate summit that people are marching for today.
    Maurice Strong. Photograph: David Karp/AP   
The current Unep chief, Achim Steiner, said: "Strong will forever be remembered for placing the environment on the international agenda and at the heart of development. He shepherd global environmental governance processes."
Steiner added that a strong deal at Paris would be a "fitting tribute" to Strong's legacy. We'll have more on this later from my colleague John Vidal, who knew Strong. 
In his last interview with the Guardian, in 2010, Strong said of the state of the world's environment and the challenge of climate change:
Analytically, I'm pessimistic. I believe the odds are against us for making the changes we need to make in time. But, operationally, I'm optimistic because I believe that it is still possible. Tougher the longer we delay it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.36am GMT
block-time published-time 11.18am GMT 
 Human chain in Paris  
The march that was expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people on the streets of Paris today may have been forbidden, but there are still plenty of people out calling for action on climate change in the French capital today. 
Tweets and live streams on Periscope show what appears to be hundreds of people forming a human chain in central Paris, holding placards calling for "climate justice" and to "keep it [fossil fuels] in the ground".
enltrMassive human chain in Paris for #climatejustice. No war, no warming. #COP21pic.twitter.com/Od9Osyg8sa
 - Amis de la Terre FR (@amisdelaterre) November 29, 2015
enltrTaiwan #climate youth part of thousands forming human chain in #paris#nofibs#peoplesclimate#COP21pic.twitter.com/l9uCU03MfF
 - John Englart EAM (@takvera) November 29, 2015
enltrA human chain "for peace and climate justice" Paris pic.twitter.com/g7Hw1O4A9Q
 - Antonia Juhasz (@AntoniaJuhasz) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 11.05am GMT 
 Pope Francis and UN secretary general donate shoes in Paris  
As well as the Pope, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has donated his shoes (a pair of new-looking running trainers), to the Paris shoe installation:
enltrBan Ki-moon donated his shoes to stand in solidarity w/ people of Paris unable to join a #climatemarch today. #COP21pic.twitter.com/38JGGTqvOj
 - United Nations (@UN) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 10.59am GMT 
Want to know what these marches are all about? If you can make it to London on Thursday, there's a Guardian Live event on the Paris climate summit with Australian Tim Flannery (former chief commissioner of the Climate Commission there), former UK climate diplomat John Ashton and Friends of the Earth CEO Craig Bennett. Find out more on the event listing.
Our climate talks expert, Fiona Harvey, has also written a guide on everything you need to know about the Paris summit. Or you can watch our 60-second video explainer:
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02am GMT
block-time published-time 10.45am GMT 
 Record numbers in Australia and New Zealand  
March organisers say there were at least 140,000 people marching in Australia and 33,000 in New Zealand, both of which they say are the highest ever turn-outs for climate marches in both countries. The Guardian is unable to independently verify the numbers.
block-time published-time 10.37am GMT 
Climate Home, part of the Guardian Environment Network, is in Paris this morning interviewing Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director at Avaaz, which has been heavily involved in organising the marches. You can watch the interview here:
   Emma Ruby-Sachs  
Of the shoes installation in Paris, she says:
It's kind of an incredible monument both to the voices that have been silenced but also to that hope for action that comes out of this city.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.29am GMT 
Remember, you can share your photos and videos of the marches via Guardian Witness (just click the blue button above on this blog). Here are some already submitted, from Australia to Dublin:
I marched for Laurie
Website MarchlMe matched marchers with those in Paris whose March was cancelled.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By jillfavero
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:35 
Paris - preparing for tomorrow's virtual march
Since the march has been cancelled by the French authorities in the wake of the atrocious attacks on November 13, an alternative has been found in which people can deposit shoes tomorrow morning in la place de la République, together with their messages to world leaders. The shoes will march for us in a virtual way.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By SarahMarder
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:50 
A little bit of artivism for the march tomorrow
Double-sided placard which I'm carrying at the march tomorrow, bigging up the 'keep it in the ground' campaign...
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By James Milroy
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:22 
The T-Shirts are in!
Getting ready for the Dublin Climate March on the 29th. The largest mobilisation Ireland will have ever seen!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By smartgreenliv
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 19:30 
block-time published-time 10.02am GMT 
 Corbyn to speak at London march  
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is among the public figures attending the London march later today, a spokeswoman has just confirmed to me. I'll update this post when I know exactly when and where along the march - there's a rally at 1pm at Millbank and speeches later at 2.45pm by parliament.
Corbyn's attendance looks like a last-minute decision, given his name wasn't on lists of speakers even two days ago. According to my colleague Robin McKie, he will attack the Conservative party's leadership on climate change, following a series of green policies being cancelled over the summer, saying "There are no more hugs for the husky, instead it's a passionate embrace for the carbon polluters." 
It's the first time I can think of a leading Labour politician speaking at a big climate march - the most high profile politician is usually Green party MP, Caroline Lucas.
Other speakers from 2.45pm include NUS vice-president, Piers Telemacque, and musician and activist Charlotte Church who is singing with a 12-piece choir.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.08am GMT
block-time published-time 9.43am GMT 
People are gathering in Cape Town's Keizergracht Street. The weather for the march there looks a lot better than London, where 40mph gusts are forecast this afternoon.
enltrThe #CapeClimateMarch crowds are gathering! For the love of our #CoolClimate ! #ClimateMarch#EmissionsMustFallpic.twitter.com/kVLRQ2hlw
 - Cape Climate March (@CTClimateMarch) November 29, 2015
enltrLet's ROLL team! @CTClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/HSvl4Nivpa
 - Greenpop (@GreenpopSA) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 9.34am GMT 
 Summary  
Good morning from London, where march organisers are hoping to beat the turn-out of last year's climate march which attracted around 27,000 people. The march starts at noon (local time) at Park Lane.
In Paris, as Claire pointed out, the planned march was forbidden over security fears. But thousands of shoes have been left in the Place de la Republique as an installation instead, among them a pair with Pope Francis's name on and the the inscription Laudato Si' (Praised be). 
Cardinal Turkson, seen as a potential future Pope, said: 
All members of the Catholic community are warmly invited to offer their support in prayer, word and action. And we're inviting all the bishops and priests around the world to offer the celebration of the Eucharist, on 29 November, for a responsible and successful international conference and summit. We want to encourage the faithful and many others to exercise their ecological citizenship. 
The BBC's David Shukman is at the scene in Paris:
enltrA sea of shoes in Place de la Republique in Paris: protests are banned here so you have to imagine them #COP21pic.twitter.com/AetuepjzAt
 - David Shukman (@davidshukmanbbc) November 29, 2015
Among those who are bringing their shoes is Yeb Sano, the former Philippines climate negotiator who famously broke down in tears at several summits. He's just finished a weeks-long pilgrimage from Rome to Paris for the climate talks - hence the pilgrim shoes. 
enltrPope Francis has reportedly sent his pair of shoes in solidarity with the March of Shoes in Paris tomorrow. I'll bring my pair pilgrim shoes
- Yeb Saño (@YebSano) November 28, 2015
There's also a group of indigenous people meeting in Paris for a 'healing ceremony' in solidarity with those who lost their lives in the recent terror attacks.
enltr"A moment of prayer & a peace offering" - indigenous people coming together for healing ceremony #Paris@g0ldtoothpic.twitter.com/5Ur7wkYm3I
 - 350 dot org (@350) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37am GMT
block-time published-time 9.14am GMT 
I'm now handing over the live blog to my colleague Adam Vaughan in London, who'll continue the coverage of marches across the globe today.
Thanks for reading and for all your contributions here, on Twitter and via GuardianWitness.
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
Here are some from readers across the globe:
 Bangladesh      Global Climate March - Bangladesh 
Global Climate March - Bangladesh with representation of BRIT from ACTION/2015!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By rahatulashekin
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:38 
    Kenya      The climate change March
In Nairobi Kenya the Climate Change march was very successful,we managed to spread the information to the public,we got support from 350.org which to us was a double plus,and I believe the talk in Paris will bear fruits to our planet.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By fred buluku
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:58 
    New Zealand      Young and old Takaka NZ
300 or so Golden Bay citizens marched up ( and then back down) our small main street to voice our concern about Climate Change...to a Govt that so far isn't taking much notice
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Aroha88
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:06 
block-time published-time 9.03am GMT 
Which countries are doing the most to stop global warming?
Check out how different nations compare in our interactive:
 Related:  Which countries are doing the most to stop dangerous global warming?
block-time published-time 8.47am GMT 
 Beirut march is underway  
Despite the rain, Lebanese protesters are currently marching the streets of the capital, Beirut:
enltrThe March is still going regardless of the rain #ClimateMarch#peoplesclimate@IndyACTpic.twitter.com/IeSyHxlWk7
 - Safa' Al Jayoussi (@Safaaljayoussi) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 8.25am GMT 
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
Demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes in a sign of solidarity:
enltrOur shoes will march for us. Dawn #MarcheClimat#ClimateMarch#ActInParispic.twitter.com/hSEvhzXjsc
 - Nicole Ghio (@nicoleghio) November 29, 2015
Writing in the Guardian last week, Naomi Klein argued that the banning of the Paris march was silencing the very voices that need to be heard at the climate summit:
For just two weeks every few years, the voices of the people who are getting hit first and worst get a little bit of space to be heard at the place where fateful decisions are made. That's why Pacific islanders and Inuit hunters and low-income people of colour from places like New Orleans travel for thousands of miles to attend. The expense is enormous, in both dollars and carbon, but being at the summit is a precious chance to speak about climate change in moral terms and to put a human face to this unfolding catastrophe.
Even in these rare moments, frontline voices do not have enough of a platform in the official climate meetings, in which the microphone is dominated by governments and large, well-funded green groups. The voices of ordinary people are primarily heard in grassroots gatherings parallel to the summit, as well as in marches and protests, which in turn attract media coverage.
Now the French government has decided to take away the loudest of these megaphones, claiming that securing marches would compromise its ability to secure the official summit zone where politicians will meet. 
 Related:  What's really at stake at the Paris climate conference now marches are banned | Naomi Klein
 Related:  Quel est le véritable enjeu de la conférence sur le climat de Paris maintenant que les manifestations sont interdites ?
block-time published-time 8.14am GMT 
 Summary: Australia marches for climate action  
Climate change rallies rolled on across Australia on Sunday, following well attended protests in Melbourne on Friday and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday.
On Sunday, it was the turn of Sydney, Canberra, Adelaide, Hobart and Perth.
Australia's climate-sensitive neighbours in the Pacific were a key focus for the climate change rally in Sydney, with representatives of communities from Pacific nations - including Tuvalu, Nauru, Kiribati and Tonga - prominent at the front of the march from the Domain to Circular Quay.
More than 40,000 people braved Sydney's heat for the rally on Sunday afternoon, calling on Australia to play a lead role in brokering binding emissions targets for the world to keep global temperature rise below 2C, and to commit to greater domestic emissions cuts than the 26% to 28% the government is currently proposing.
In Canberra, people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate about 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number was closer to 6,000
The Perth event started sombrely. At 3.25pm, at least 5,000 people sat in silence in Hay Street Mall to mark people who have lost their lives, homes and livelihoods to the effects of climate change. The group, in their colour blocks, had marched 2km from Wellington Square and stretched the whole 300-metre length, watched by bemused Christmas shoppers clutching plastic bags and taking photos of the crowd.
The march was led by a group from the Noongar Whadjuk nation and addressed by Christian, Islamic, Jewish, and Hindu faith leaders.
You can read the full report here:
 Related:  Climate change protests across Australia - tens of thousands march
block-time published-time 8.02am GMT 
 South Korea's climate march begins  
The Seoul march is underway, with protesters making use of some inventive props:
    Nuns holding balloons prepare to march during a rally in central Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      Participants holding umbrellas with the message "Well for us, Hell for earth" march in Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
And of course it's not just Europe that is yet to march: here's a selection of other cities that will be on the move today. Please do get in touch below the line to share details of others you know or are going to. Again, all times are local.
 Durban, South Africa 
10am at Suncoast Boulevard.
 Cape Town, South Africa 
11am from Cape Peninsula University of Technology.
 Beirut, Lebanon 
Leaving Horsh Beirut at 9am, marchers will take the Damascus Road to reach Beirut Downtown at 12.30pm.
 Kampala, Uganda 
9am from Makerere University Freedom Square.
 Seoul, South Korea 
1pm from Cheonggye Square.
 Kiev, Ukraine 
Shevchenko Park at 12.30pm.
You can find more listings here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55am GMT
block-time published-time 7.37am GMT 
 European marches on Sunday: when and where  
As Europe wakes up on Sunday morning, these are the places to keep an eye on - or head to - for climate marches today. All times are local.
 London 
Rally forming from 12 noon at Park Lane - nearest tube Hyde Park Corner & Green Park.
 Berlin 
Midday at central station.
 Madrid 
Midday at Plaza de Cibeles.
 Barcelona 
11.30am at the Via Laietana.
 Rome 
2pm at Piazza Campo de' Fiori.
 Amsterdam 
Midday at Museum Square.
 Copenhagen 
Leaving 1pm from Den Røde Plads Square in Nørrebro to march to the parliament building, Christiansborg.
 Stockholm 
1pm at Norra Latin schoolyard.
 Budapest 
Erzsébet Square at 1pm.
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
block-time published-time 7.16am GMT 
 Japanese campaigners march in Tokyo  
Japan Today reported that around 1,000 people marched in Tokyo on Saturday, but that organisers had hoped for many more:
Some demonstrators were disappointed that the number of participants was not as many as expected, with  Chigusa Okano, a 22-year-old university student in Tokyo, saying: "I especially want young people to show interest in this matter."
 Alex Brodie, a 41-year-old company worker living in Tokyo, said he finds Japanese people's lack of interest in the issue "pathetic".
"Japan needs to wake up. We need to have solar power on every roof top," he said as he marched with his wife and child, while calling on the Japanese government to push for policies to introduce more renewable energy.
The issue of clean, renewable energy has been a key one since a tsunami swamped the Fukushima nuclear plant in 2011, sending three reactors into meltdown.
"Japan must take the lead in the summit to promote renewable energy because Japan is a rare country that has experienced such a big disaster," rally organiser Daigo Ichikawa told AFP news agency.
    Environmentalists hold up placards that read "Climate Action Now!" during a rally in Tokyo on Saturday. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 6.57am GMT 
 Bangladesh march for climate justice  
AFP reports that  more than 5,000 people took part in climate marches on Saturday across 30 different locations in Bangladesh - a country on the front line of climate change, exposed to rising seas, superstorms and expanding deserts.
    People take part in the global climate march in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Saturday. Photograph: KM Asad/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
Unity is the theme of the People's Climate rally in Perth. Led by Noongar Whadjuk MCs, and kicked off with a Whadjuk dance to clear the bad spirits, the crowd then listened in silence to a multi-faith speech led by Perth Anglican assistant Bishop Tom Wilmot.
Wilmot introduced Jewish, Hindu and Sikh leaders and made a point of referring to Rateb Jneid, president of the Islamic Council of Western Australia, as his "brother in the faith", repeating: "And he is my brother."
There has been no mention of the Paris attacks, but the group of more than 1000 people, which has now left Wellington Square to march on the city, will sit for a minute's silence in Hay Street Mall to mark those who have already lost their lives, homes and livelihoods from climate-related events. In particular the minute's silence will honour those affected by bushfires, which have killed six people in Australia this November.
 Kevin Jolley, president of the firefighters' union of WA, said that anyone who had spent time on a fire line knew that the effects of man-made climate change were devastating and real. "There are no sceptics on the end of a fire hose," Jolly said. 
block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
 Philippines climate march  
Activists in the Philippines marched on Saturday, with Rappler reporting that thousands took to the streets across several cities, including the capital, Manila.
Agence France-Presse reported:
Some 3,000 people including religious clergy, students and activists marched through the Philippine capital of Manila demanding curbs on emissions to mute the impact of climate change, which is blamed for a spike in disastrous extreme weather.
"Protect our common home" and "climate justice" were written on the placards held aloft by the surging crowd.
"We want to send a message to the rest of the world, especially the world leaders at the climate talks, to say that our survival is not negotiable," said Denise Fontanilla, spokeswoman for the Asian People's Movement on Debt and Development. 
enltrPhilippines #ClimateMarch video from @inquirerdotnet@KSabilloINQhttps://t.co/jvhZrToakn#ClimateJustice
 - Airah Cadiogan (@eightyseas) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.09am GMT 
The Perth marchers are getting ready to go. (Take a look at this post to get up to speed on the colour-coding.) They have been asked to "stay classy" as they march through the city streets, Calla Wahlquist  reports.
enltrStarting to gather into colour blocks. Need a few photos to fit them all in. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/LQeKP57pLC
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.02am GMT 
 Jakarta marches for climate action  
Indonesian president Joko Widodo left Jakarta for Paris this morning. His country has pledged to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 29% by 2030.
But activists say Indonesia could be doing more to reduce its use of fossil fuels.
In September, after months of raging forest fires, Indonesia overtook China and the US to become the world's biggest climate polluter.
    Protesters participate in a climate march in Jakarta on Sunday. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters      
block-time published-time 5.47am GMT 
A reminder: you can contribute to this live blog and our other climate march coverage via GuardianWitness here or the big blue button at the top of this page.
Here are some of the pictures readers have shared so far.
 From Sydney, Australia:      The Ice Cream is Melting 
Sydney Domain, 2015, 29th Nov. Climate Change march
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Valeria Morich
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:32 
    From New Zealand:      Small-town New Zealand rises to the challenge
This parade engaged the creative spirits of a ladies knitting group, a recycle group and puppet makers to express a positive response to the challenges of climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Mairi Jay
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:15 
    From Edinburgh, Scotland:      Scotland's Climate March 28 November
Scotland's huge colourful climate march winding down the Mound
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Caitlin Hamlett
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 4:15 
    From Geneva, Switzerland:      Geneva climate march
5000 thousand people attended the climate march in Geneva this Saturday
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By yvwinteler
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:22 
    From San Luis Obispo, California, US:      Getting ready to March in San Luis Obispo California
We had about 200 people come out today to create a better world. Our Mayor, framers,and children were amongst our speaking demanding action on climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Heidi Harmon
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:44 
block-time published-time 5.33am GMT 
All roads in Sydney's CBD that were closed for the march have now reopened and there are no traffic delays reported.
Safe journey home, Sydney marchers. Keep reading the blog, though. There's plenty more to come ...
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
 Perth march begins  
Noongar Whadjuk man Noel Nannup  gives the welcome, saying: "Our planet is dying." 
Protesters say the fight for the climate can't be separated from the right of Indigenous people to country, Calla Wahlquist reports from the Perth rally.
enltrNoongar spirit dance to clear the bad spirits. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/btF1ovxCEO
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
More than 300 people are gathered in coloured clumps under the trees that line Perth's Wellington Square, ahead of the people's climate rally.
One of those is Gerard Siero, an ecological urbanism researcher at UWA (the University of Western Australia), who is wearing a yellow linen suit and leaning against his folding bike, which collapsed down to a 10kg stick for ease of commuting. He's marching for the solutions to climate change.
"We have all the solutions we need to solve the problem," Siero said. "We don't have the will on behalf of our politicians, but we have the will on behalf of the people.
"What we are really trying to march with today is to let the politicians know that they have to get out of the way."
Siero said Australia had the capacity and technology to switch off carbon, but it was fast running out of time. "We're at the point where if we don't so something it will be too late to do anything but get out the ambulances," he said.
block-time published-time 4.57am GMT 
 Sydney lord mayor: 'at least 45,000 marchers'  
 Clover Moore, Sydney's lord mayor, says these numbers would make today the biggest climate march ever held in the city :
enltrI've just been told by organisers there were at least 45,000 people, making it the biggest climate march ever in Sydney #PeoplesClimate
 - Clover Moore (@CloverMoore) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.49am GMT 
My colleague Calla Wahlquist  is in Perth, where marchers will be setting off in later today:
enltrMore than 100 people have already gathered at Wellington Square, clinging to the shade on the fringe. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Lu9BkNIvtm
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
We'll be following the progress of that march once it gets underway too, plus you can keep an eye on updates @callapilla.
block-time published-time 4.41am GMT 
With the march in Paris - host of the COP21 climate summit - cancelled after the terrorist attacks of 13 November, activists have turned to other ways of showing their support for the global climate march, Reuters reports:
Activists plan to join arms and form a "human chain" in Paris on Sunday to urge action on global warming, in a muted rally after attacks on the city by Islamic State. 
More than 2,000 climate events are planned in cities including Sydney, Jakarta, Berlin, London, Sao Paulo and New York, making it one of the biggest days of action on climate change in history, organisers say. 
Activists in France scaled back their plans when the government imposed a state of emergency after the attacks two weeks ago killed 130 people, banning the planned demonstration in Paris, meant as the biggest of all. 
In France, activists plan to form a static human chain, formed by about 3,400 people joining arms along what had been the original 3km (1.9 miles) route through central Paris from the Place de la Republique to Place de la Nation. 
"This is a moment for the whole world to join hands," said Iain Keith, campaign director for Avaaz, one of the organisers. 
Separately, more than 10,000 demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes to form a big pile in a sign of solidarity. Organisers said the Vatican even sent a pair to represent Pope Francis. 
     Shoes are symbolically placed on a sidewalk in Paris near the Place de la Republique. Photograph: Eric Gaillard/Reuters    
 Alix Mazounie of French Climate Action Network said the activists reckoned a human chain would not violate the state of emergency. 
"This is not civil disobedience," she said. The chain would break, for instance, wherever it crossed a road to avoid disrupting traffic. 
But, underscoring security worries, France put 24 green activists under house arrest before the summit, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve said on Saturday, saying they were suspected of planning violent protests at the talks. 
Foreign minister  Laurent Fabius welcomed the worldwide demonstrations. "It is very positive," Fabius said, for governments to feel public pressure to act.
block-time published-time 4.22am GMT 
While Australian PM  Malcolm Turnbull  heads to Paris for the climate summit, Puppet Malcolm decided to take a turn in the Sydney march:
    A giant Malcolm Turnbull puppet joins tens of thousands of marchers in Sydney's Domain as part of the global people's climate march on Sunday 29 November 2015. Photograph: Janine Israel/Guardian   
And it seems he brought an old, um, pal with him:
undltr @GuardianAuspic.twitter.com/BrQ359YOUn
 - Susan Mackay (@mackaysuzie) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.08am GMT 
The Sydney march is well and truly on the move, reports Ben Doherty :
Playing 'Hot, Hot, Hot' as they march down Macquarie St towards the Opera House. Jubilant, boisterous mood.
     Sydney protesters march down Macquarie St in the people's climate march. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 4.05am GMT 
The Canberra march has wrapped up without incident, and ACT Policing has issued Guardian Australia with this statement from operation commander Jo Cameron :
There was a large, well-behaved crowd and it was a peaceful event. There were no arrests and no incidents.
There were some road closures during the march, which were opened as soon as possible.
As you were, Canberra. Carry on with your weekend.
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
My colleague Janine Israel has also been at the Sydney rally, and reports that many Islander and Indigenous communities are represented at the march.
She spoke to members of Australia's Tongan community. One protester told her:
Our islands are drowning. Where are we going to go?
     Members of Australia's Tongan community at the Sydney people's climate march. Photograph: Janine Israel for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.43am GMT 
 What are Australia's climate targets?  
Australia's prime minister,  Malcolm Turnbull, will arrive in Paris later tonight for key international climate talks, armed with a climate target that's lower than many other developed countries.
The Australian government has committed to cutting emissions by 26%-28% of 2005 levels by 2030.
By comparison, the United States has vowed to cut emissions by 26%-28% too - but five years earlier than Australia, by 2025.
Canada has committed to a 30% cut and so has New Zealand, while the European Union has vowed to reduce emissions by 40% of 1990 levels by 2030.
The Labor party released its own targets on Friday. It wants a 45% cut by 2030, a figure Turnbull has criticised as "heroic" and expensive.
But modelling by leading economist Warwick McKibbon, did not find a large difference in the economic impacts of the targets. A reduction of 26% would shave between 0.2% and 0.3% of the GDP, while a 45% reduction would see between 0.5% and 0.7% lost. 
block-time published-time 3.32am GMT 
Helpful reminder for those marching in Sydney right now:
enltrQuick PSA for Sydney: there are water stations dotted around. You should drink some #climatemarch#peopleclimatepic.twitter.com/JC6NySchf8
 - GetUp! (@GetUp) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
The crowds in Sydney have observed one minute's silence to reflect upon those most affected by climate change, ended by the sounding of a didgeridoo.
Many of those there are saying that the Domain - no small space - is almost full to capacity.
Once the speeches and songs are finished, the rally is set to march through the streets of Sydney in colour-coordinated blocks:
yellow for "solutions", eg renewables.
orange for "just transitions", advocating for fair jobs.
red to stand with those already on the front line of climate change.
purple for diversity of faith and cultures.
blue to represent future generations.
white for those in healthcare and science.
blue to stand up for threatened ecosystems.
and a group marching for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The crowd listen to speeches at the Domain in Sydney, Australia, on 29 November 2015 as part of global climate marches in the lead-up to COP 21 in Paris. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian   
block-time published-time 3.10am GMT 
Although it is very hot in Sydney today, with protesters - those who weren't canny enough to bring their umbrellas - seeking out whatever shade they can find, activists are well aware that the real front line against climate change lies further west, in the Pacific islands.
A good primer on that situation is this report by my colleague Oliver Milman :
The cause for concern is clear - Nasa recently reported the world's sea level has risen nearly 8cm since 1992, with the Pacific experiencing a more rapid increase than other oceans.
A rise of around a metre by the end of the century now looks likely. For low-lying islands in the Pacific, this means coastal erosion, saltwater seeping into precious rainwater catchments and ruined crops.
Meanwhile, rising temperatures will heighten the risk of diseases, including those carried by mosquitos. Cyclones are expected to become more severe. The World Health Organisation estimates climate change will cause around 250,000 deaths globally between 2030 and 2050. 
     Pacific Islands will be on the 'frontline' of climate change, the Sydney climate change march is told. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.03am GMT 
My colleague  Ben Doherty is in Sydney's Domain, sheltering from the sun and hearing from Professor Tim Flannery, one of Australia's leading climate change activists, who says today "looks like the largest climate march ever in Australia ".
The Paris talks, he said, are the last chance to save "many things we care about, like the Great Barrier Reef ... We are coming to this issue very late."
There are no easy fixes to the climate problem, he warned, but Australia needs to close down polluting industries and dependence on fossil fuels:
We are meeting in the home city of the Australian prime minister. We need to send a very powerful message to him: do what the people demand.
He said the Australian people would not accept anything less than a successful outcome at Paris. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
It was a very peaceful, family-oriented affair in Canberra, as people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate around 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number is closer to 6,000. Canberrans are fairly cautious about protesting, as many are public servants and are often reluctant to make political statements.
One of the coordinators of the event, Emma Robinson from the Conservation Council, said she was not surprised that so many showed up in the capital.
"Climate change is and has always been everyone's business," she said. 
The event was staffed by about 80 volunteers, most of whom are Canberra locals who are part of the Conservation Council.
Former chief scientist of Australia, Penny Sackett, said that protests like Sunday's make people feel as though they are taking action on climate change.
"People can become discouraged because it appears as though [political] change does not happen swiftly enough," she told Guardian Australia.
 She said the march was a message from voters to world leaders who are about to meet on climate change in Paris: "We're watching." 
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
The Canberra Times now estimates there are more than 5,000 people taking part in the march there.
enltrThis gives you a better ideas of the numbers marching down from Parliament House, #Canberra. #peoplesclimate#cbrpic.twitter.com/6aNEeVMYVQ
 - Richard Tuffin (@RichardTuffin) November 29, 2015
Attendance numbers are always a tricky thing with marches, with totals from organisers and police often varying wildly.
Police estimates for Melbourne, for example, put the crowd numbers by the end of Friday night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out.
Similarly, estimates for Brisbane on Saturday came in at between 5,000 and 10,000.
We're yet to hear estimates for the Sydney crowd but organisers already seem overwhelmed by the numbers who have shown up so far.
block-time published-time 2.38am GMT 
An enterprising cyclist at the Adelaide rally:
    A cyclist wears a helmet with a solar panel attached as he participates in a march along the main street of Adelaide. Photograph: David Gray/Reuters   
Meanwhile, some Sydney marchers seek out the shade:
enltrToo hot out in the middle! #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Y7ejzXipdt
 - Paddy Manning (@gpaddymanning) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
 Sydney is go!  
The Sydney rally is underway, with thousands already in attendance and many more still arriving:
enltrThe power is ours! Yehhhh Sydney! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/BqqlzByULb
 - Greenpeace Aus Pac (@GreenpeaceAustP) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge #greens turnout for #PeoplesClimate !! Rally starting now. pic.twitter.com/laNbMg50Y4
 - Greens NSW (@GreensNSW) November 29, 2015
 Ben Doherty is now in the Domain, from where the march is leaving, and reports "massive numbers":
Much more multi-coloured than the Hyde Park beginnings, people in all manner of colours, lots of associated causes: anti-nuclear, church groups, refugee groups.
One guy has a mallard on his head, and a tree growing out of his backpack.
Sydney lord mayor Clover Moore tells the crowd that COP21 in Paris will be the most important meeting of our lifetime.
"On it depends the future of our planet," she says.
block-time published-time 2.18am GMT 
Hello Hobart! Tasmanian marchers are also assembling, with a minute's silence for Paris, which is hosting this week's climate talks, but - after the terrorist attacks of 13 November - will not be holding its own climate march:
enltrA min of silence for #Paris & imagining a clean, compassionate future in #Hobart at #peoplesclimate march #cop21pic.twitter.com/p57G5JG1Yz
 - Claire Havens (@ClaireHavens) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.07am GMT 
My colleague Ben Doherty is with the Sydney marchers and sends this dispatch from the start line:
 At the Sydney march, there are red shirts everywhere. Solid, if not yet spectacular numbers are gathering at the north end of Hyde Park, and marching into the Domain in bright sunshine. 
Labor deputy leader Tanya Plibersek, who brought her own phalanx of rosily-attired Young Laborites, gave a rangy press conference at which she rejected the 'heroic' label Malcolm Turnbull  affixed to Labor's emissions targets (it wasn't meant as a compliment, Plibersek seems to suspect).
She condemned Turnbull for "stopping off on the way to Paris to lecture other heads of government to do more on climate change, while he is doing less".
Plibersek said Labor's targets would require significant change in Australia, but that the country had already seen, and embraced, change aimed at reducing emissions.
She said the $1m Australia has offered to contribute to the Commonwealth's new Climate Finance Access Hub (established at the CHOGM meeting in Valetta) was "pathetically puny".
The hub will be set up to help small island nations vulnerable to climate change access global funds for mitigation and adaptation.
Plibersek said Australia, given its role as a leader in the Pacific region, needed to do more to help its neighbours, some of whom face "an existential threat" from climate change.
 Related:  Turnbull says Shorten's 'heroic' climate target aimed at making political point
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08am GMT
block-time published-time 2.02am GMT 
Sydney marchers are also warming up - as is the weather, with that blue sky deciding to put in an appearance after all - and is expected to be the biggest Australian march of the day. Will NSW be able to best Melbourne's 40,000+ from Friday ?
Reader Tim Senior and friends are well stocked with placards for the Sydney rally:
enltrOn our way to the #peoplesclimate#climatemarch. On public transport of course! pic.twitter.com/FMs5JiOPXZ
 - Tim Senior (@timsenior) November 29, 2015
A reminder: do keep your pictures, videos, thoughts and headcounts coming, to me directly @Claire_Phipps or via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of the blog. Thank you!
block-time published-time 1.53am GMT 
My colleague Shalailah Medhora is at the Canberra march, which has just started. She estimates there are around 3,000 people there so far:
enltrAnd they're off! Around 3,000 on the march to the tent embassy. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/Def0zmsbqz
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
enltr"There are no climate sceptics at the end of a hose". ACT firefighters union at climate rally. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/HYP0ASWQoC
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
I'll be tracking the progress of the Canberra march - along with the others today - on this live blog, plus you can keep an eye on it via @shalailah.
block-time published-time 1.40am GMT 
Many thousands of people marched in New Zealand on Saturday, with more events today: check here for those listings.
An estimated 7,000 turned out in Wellington:
enltr @Claire_Phipps we had a fantastic turn out in Wellington yesterday! #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/rFlsGye4YB
 - Torken Faddy (@TFaddy) November 29, 2015
And there were around 15,000 marchers in Auckland, with 8,000 more in Christchurch:
    Protesters of all ages marched in Christchurch, New Zealand, on Saturday. Photograph: PJ Heller/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 What is likely to be agreed in Paris?  
We know already what the biggest emitters have committed to:
The EU will cut its emissions by 40%, compared with 1990 levels, by 2030.
The US will cut its emissions by 26% to 28%, compared with 2005 levels, by 2025.
China will agree that its emissions will peak by 2030.
Nations responsible for more than 90% of global emissions have now come up with their targets - known in the UN jargon as intended nationally determined contributions, or INDCs.
These include all of the major developed and developing countries, though their contributions vary: in the case of developed countries, actual cuts in emissions, but for developing countries a range of targets including limits on emissions compared to "business as usual", and pledges to increase low-carbon energy or preserve forests.
Analysis of the INDCS, endorsed by the UN, has suggested that these pledges are enough to hold the world to about 2.7C or 3C of warming. That is not quite enough to meet the scientific advice.
However, that is not the end of the story. One of the key components of any Paris agreement would be to institute a system of review of the emissions targets every five years, with a view to ratcheting them upwards.
Another, and complementary, approach is to make more effort to bring down emissions outside the UN process, for instance by engaging "non-state actors" such as cities, local governments and businesses to do more.
block-time published-time 1.27am GMT 
 Canberra march gets started  
It's Canberra's turn now, and again it looks to be a very healthy turnout under a beautiful blue sky (it's rather grey here in Sydney, not that that should put anyone off):
enltr #peoplesclimate March kicking off in Canberra! pic.twitter.com/d11z8jJYC6
 - Fair Go For Canberra (@FairGoCanberra) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 1.13am GMT 
 Adelaide march begins  
The Adelaide rally is underway and it's a good turnout, estimated in the thousands:
enltrOver 5000 in #Adelaide marching for jobs, justice & a safe #climate ! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/bn7LsXdm4f
 - AYCC (@AYCC) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge turnout for the #adelaide#peoplesclimate march pic.twitter.com/5eD9KDQWIX
 - Michael Garrod (@MickyJim74) November 29, 2015
enltrMarching for our planet! #climatemarch#adelaide#climatechange#peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/IPVvmxVTcz
 - Mike Crowhurst (@TheCunningCrow) November 29, 2015
A reminder: you can contribute your own pictures and videos via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of this live blog, and/or to me @Claire_Phipps.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.13am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
Avaaz, the campaign group behind the march, says more than 120,000 people have already taken part - with thousands of rallies yet to take place on Sunday, the main day of action. 
Thousands of people marched in Brisbane on Saturday - organisers put it at 10,000 - and more in Darwin, following Friday's 40,000-strong rally in Melbourne. 
Organisers said thousands took part in 35 New Zealand locations - the smallest being on Raoul Island, where the island's entire population of seven turned out.
My colleague Melissa Davey was at the Melbourne march on Friday evening and sent this report:
Thousands of people were marching through Melbourne's CBD on Friday evening in what is expected to the largest in a series of climate change protests being held throughout Australia over the weekend.
They gathered in front of the state library and, as the lawns filled with protesters putting finishing touches on their placards, they took to the surrounding roads just in time for peak hour.
Environmentalists, unionists, religious organisations, youth groups, doctors, Indigenous organisations, and people from the aid and development sector were part of the crowd. Police estimates put the crowd numbers by the end of the night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out for the event.
 Related:  Victorians take to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change
block-time published-time 12.56am GMT 
 Why Paris, why now?  
After the terrorist attacks of 13 November, the meeting of world leaders in the French capital beginning on Monday has an added poignancy.
But the COP 21 talks - it stands for conference of the parties, the yearly United Nations climate change conference; this is the 21st - will focus on hammering out a new global agreement to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and with them the threat of climate change.
Here are a couple of key questions answered by the Guardian's environment reporter Fiona Harvey :
 Why now? 
Current commitments on greenhouse gas emissions run out in 2020, so at Paris governments are expected to produce an agreement on what happens for the decade after that at least, and potentially beyond.
 Why is this important? 
Scientists have warned that if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, we will pass the threshold beyond which global warming becomes catastrophic and irreversible. That threshold is estimated as a temperature rise of 2C above pre-industrial levels, and on current emissions trajectories we are heading for a rise of about 5C.
That may not sound like much, but the temperature difference between today's world and the last ice age was about 5C, so seemingly small changes in temperature can mean big differences for the Earth.
 Will world leaders go to Paris? 
Yes. The heads of state or government of more than 130 countries have already said they will come. These include French president Francois Hollande, Barack Obama of the US, Xi Jinping of China, Narendra Modi of India, Angela Merkel  of Germany, Australia's Malcolm Turnbull, John Key of New Zealand and David Cameron of the UK.
Unlike the Copenhagen talks in 2009, however, at which world leaders turned up at the last minute of the two weeks of talks, this time the leaders will arrive at the beginning of the conference, give their negotiating teams clear instructions, and expect a fully formed agreement at the end of it.
 Related:  Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
block-time published-time 12.48am GMT 
 Marches in Australia  
Some Australian cities have already met and marched, with Melbourne getting in first on Friday evening, and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday. I'll have reports and pictures from those marches on this live blog shortly, along with news from New Zealand, which held most of its events on Saturday too.
Here's the line-up for today:
 Adelaide : Action started from 11am local (11.30am AEDT) at Ester Lipman Gardens, adjacent to the Torrens Parade Ground. 
 Canberra:  Speakers from 12 midday at Parliament Lawns before the march to the Tent Embassy grounds and West Lawns.
 Sydney : Marchers are asked to gather at 12.30 for a 1pm start from the Domain.
 Hobart : March begins at 1pm from Parliament Lawns.
 Perth : Another 1pm start (4pm AEDT), from Wellington Square.
Plus a heap of other marches - if one can heap a march - in other towns and cities: check out the list on the People's Climate March website. 
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Welcome to live coverage of the global climate march - a continent-spanning series of rallies which organisers hope will see millions of people join to highlight the need for a worldwide consensus on tackling climate change ahead of the COP21 talks in Paris, which open tomorrow.
I'll be kicking off this live blog from Sydney, handing over later to colleagues in London and New York, and aiming to bring you updates from marches in all those places and everywhere in between.
Last year, tens of thousands of people demonstrated in London, Paris, Berlin and Brussels; thousands more turned out in Sydney and Brisbane, with 30,000 thronging the streets of Melbourne. In New York, more than 300,000 marchers took part, on a day of 2,700 simultaneous climate events worldwide.
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
If you're taking part in the marches and want to share a story, an observation, a pun or a picture, please do get in touch below the line or give me a shout on Twitter @Claire_Phipps. I'll tweet key developments from there too.
You can also share your pictures and videos of the march via GuardianWitness here or the blue button at the top of the blog, just up there.

Load-Date: November 29, 2015


End of Document




Global climate march 2015: Pope Francis and Ban Ki-moon donate 'marching shoes' - live; Millions expected to take to streets ahead of Paris climate summit Sydney to Seattle, via Hong Kong, Berlin, London and Sao Paulo, march on SundayClimate change protests take place across Australia Keep it in the ground: the Guardian's climate change campaignInteractive: why we are joining the global climate march
The Guardian
November 29, 2015 Sunday 12:41 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 9564 words
Byline: Claire Phipps in Sydney, Adam Vaughan in London
Body


block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT 
The wind is blowing hard, the rain is coming down but still the people have come to London in their thousands. People have travelled here from Wales, Scotland and fracking communities in Lancashire who are standing right at the front. One group from Brighton travelled here on a bus powered by chip fat, according to organisers. There are people from the Sápmi indigenous community in Sweden, where the melting arctic is having a big impact on their daily lives.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.38pm GMT 
 Tens of thousands at London march  
The Press Association is reporting that tens of thousands of people have gathered in central London for the march. I'll update you on numbers later, based on what organisers and police say.
block-time published-time 12.28pm GMT 
And here's Corbyn in London, where he's due to speak shortly ( see 12:03 ). Next to him is Lisa Nandy MP, shadow energy and climate change secretary.
enltrIt may be a wet and windy Sunday in London but Labour are out in force for today's #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/JaV4JLRTGl
 - Labour Energy (@labourenergy) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 12.24pm GMT 
Our reporter Karl Mathiesen is in Paris where the police are still out in numbers following the attacks just over a fortnight ago: 
enltrNo marching. But lots of police in Paris today. pic.twitter.com/Y20XbreqBR
 - Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
enltrInstead of marching the streets. About 200-300 Parisians are circling around the monument in Place de la republique.
- Karl Mathiesen (@KarlMathiesen) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.22pm GMT 
The march in London is attracting some big crowds, colourful outfits and famous faces (I've seen at least one Instagrammed selfie with musician Peter Gabriel. Actor Emma Thompson and singer/activist Charlotte Church are also out there somewhere). Emma Howard is on the ground for the Guardian and will be reporting live throughout the day.
enltrLondon climate march is turning out well pic.twitter.com/ArhmNVG9Hj
 - Jacob Dixon (@Justabitofjacob) November 29, 2015
enltrRight at the front with the indigenous peoples, leading London's #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/7il4EN9bQT
 - James Tennent (@duckytennent) November 29, 2015
enltrA pack of polar bears beside Wellingon Arch in London for the #ClimateMarch. pic.twitter.com/qefRkS1st5
 - Claire Marshall (@BBCMarshall) November 29, 2015
enltrReady to march with the Suffolk Greens #cop21#ClimateMarch#Londonpic.twitter.com/2g1EJFfUM4
 - SuffolkCoastalGreens (@SuffCoastGreens) November 29, 2015
Even the BT tower is joining in:
enltrIn #London ? Share your pictures of the BT Tower which is supporting #go100percent renewable energy #climatemarchpic.twitter.com/hJt2d4cpGs
 - BT Better Future (@BTBetterFuture) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.03pm GMT 
 Addressing inequality essential for tackling climate change, Corbyn to say  
Here's an excerpt of what Corbyn is expected to say in around half an hour's time:
The greener world I know is possible is a more just, a more equal, and a more productive world
To tackle climate change, we must tackle global inequality, we must show that defeating the menace of global warming will not only improve the prospects of our children and grandchildren, but will improve lives here and now 
Britain should be at the forefront of that argument, leading global efforts to a political solution to climate change at the Paris conference. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.59am GMT 
People have marched across Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, in Yemen, Tanzania, Singapore, South Africa and Benin among many other countries.
Around 70 people reportedly turned up in Sanaa in Yemen, despite reported bombing by airplanes just a few miles away.
Walid Yehia Hassan Al-Hashef, an Avaaz member in Sanaa has written in to say: 
Airstrike targets crowds of people and today early morning an airstrike hit around 4km from our protest location. We expected 150 people because of the airstrike only around 70 people showed up.
Yes, I have a message to every human being on our planet... In Yemen we are peaceful people we do not have place in our behaviors or culture for terror. We in Yemen love all people christians, jews, muslims and others.
     Yemen climate change protest on 29 November 2015. Photograph: Avaaz     
undltr #UNVolunteers#actioncounts#MarcheClimat#COP21pic.twitter.com/KqFIX8O7Vq
 - UN Benin (@UNBenin) November 29, 2015Singapore sends its love to Paris as a Green Heart
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By autumnclean
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 9:43 
Marches are getting underway in Berlin and Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam is raring to go!! 
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By guardianUser11784703
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:51 
Climate Change March begins outside Berlin HBF
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Amy Newiss
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 11:17 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.45am GMT 
 Latvian president: deal in Paris 'quite close'  
 Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis, Europe's first Green party head of state, tells Reuters that because most countries have already submitted their climate plans, a deal in Paris in two weeks' time is close. 
"...We are quite close to... an accord and a new Kyoto agreement, which would be a Paris agreement, hopefully will be reached," he said in reference to the 1997 Kyoto protocol, the only previous legally-binding international climate treaty.
Vejonis also said he hoped all leaders would agree on a "legally-binding document" in Paris, apparently putting him at odds with the US, which has made clear it does not want a treaty.
block-time published-time 11.34am GMT 
In case you were wondering (like me) what was going to happen to all the shoes in Place de la Republique, Avaaz tells me that they are being given to a social enterprise called Relais 75 Emmaus that works with homeless people.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am GMT
block-time published-time 11.26am GMT 
 Maurice Strong has died  
Tributes have been paid to Maurice Strong, the first executive director at the UN environment programme (Unep), who has died aged 86. He was also the secretary general at the Stockholm environment meeting in 1972 and Rio Earth Summit in 1992, which paved the way for the Paris climate summit that people are marching for today.
    Maurice Strong. Photograph: David Karp/AP   
The current Unep chief, Achim Steiner, said: "Strong will forever be remembered for placing the environment on the international agenda and at the heart of development. He shepherd global environmental governance processes."
Steiner added that a strong deal at Paris would be a "fitting tribute" to Strong's legacy. We'll have more on this later from my colleague John Vidal, who knew Strong. 
In his last interview with the Guardian, in 2010, Strong said of the state of the world's environment and the challenge of climate change:
Analytically, I'm pessimistic. I believe the odds are against us for making the changes we need to make in time. But, operationally, I'm optimistic because I believe that it is still possible. Tougher the longer we delay it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.36am GMT
block-time published-time 11.18am GMT 
 Human chain in Paris  
The march that was expected to attract hundreds of thousands of people on the streets of Paris today may have been forbidden, but there are still plenty of people out calling for action on climate change in the French capital today. 
Tweets and live streams on Periscope show what appears to be hundreds of people forming a human chain in central Paris, holding placards calling for "climate justice" and to "keep it [fossil fuels] in the ground".
enltrMassive human chain in Paris for #climatejustice. No war, no warming. #COP21pic.twitter.com/Od9Osyg8sa
 - Amis de la Terre FR (@amisdelaterre) November 29, 2015
enltrTaiwan #climate youth part of thousands forming human chain in #paris#nofibs#peoplesclimate#COP21pic.twitter.com/l9uCU03MfF
 - John Englart EAM (@takvera) November 29, 2015
enltrA human chain "for peace and climate justice" Paris pic.twitter.com/g7Hw1O4A9Q
 - Antonia Juhasz (@AntoniaJuhasz) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 11.05am GMT 
 Pope Francis and UN secretary general donate shoes in Paris  
As well as the Pope, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon has donated his shoes (a pair of new-looking running trainers), to the Paris shoe installation:
enltrBan Ki-moon donated his shoes to stand in solidarity w/ people of Paris unable to join a #climatemarch today. #COP21pic.twitter.com/38JGGTqvOj
 - United Nations (@UN) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 10.59am GMT 
Want to know what these marches are all about? If you can make it to London on Thursday, there's a Guardian Live event on the Paris climate summit with Australian Tim Flannery (former chief commissioner of the Climate Commission there), former UK climate diplomat John Ashton and Friends of the Earth CEO Craig Bennett. Find out more on the event listing.
Our climate talks expert, Fiona Harvey, has also written a guide on everything you need to know about the Paris summit. Or you can watch our 60-second video explainer:
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.02am GMT
block-time published-time 10.45am GMT 
 Record numbers in Australia and New Zealand  
March organisers say there were at least 140,000 people marching in Australia and 33,000 in New Zealand, both of which they say are the highest ever turn-outs for climate marches in both countries. The Guardian is unable to independently verify the numbers.
block-time published-time 10.37am GMT 
Climate Home, part of the Guardian Environment Network, is in Paris this morning interviewing Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director at Avaaz, which has been heavily involved in organising the marches. You can watch the interview here:
   Emma Ruby-Sachs  
Of the shoes installation in Paris, she says:
It's kind of an incredible monument both to the voices that have been silenced but also to that hope for action that comes out of this city.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.29am GMT 
Remember, you can share your photos and videos of the marches via Guardian Witness (just click the blue button above on this blog). Here are some already submitted, from Australia to Dublin:
I marched for Laurie
Website MarchlMe matched marchers with those in Paris whose March was cancelled.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By jillfavero
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:35 
Paris - preparing for tomorrow's virtual march
Since the march has been cancelled by the French authorities in the wake of the atrocious attacks on November 13, an alternative has been found in which people can deposit shoes tomorrow morning in la place de la République, together with their messages to world leaders. The shoes will march for us in a virtual way.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By SarahMarder
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:50 
A little bit of artivism for the march tomorrow
Double-sided placard which I'm carrying at the march tomorrow, bigging up the 'keep it in the ground' campaign...
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By James Milroy
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 13:22 
The T-Shirts are in!
Getting ready for the Dublin Climate March on the 29th. The largest mobilisation Ireland will have ever seen!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By smartgreenliv
element-witness--date 28 November 2015, 19:30 
block-time published-time 10.02am GMT 
 Corbyn to speak at London march  
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is among the public figures attending the London march later today, a spokeswoman has just confirmed to me. I'll update this post when I know exactly when and where along the march - there's a rally at 1pm at Millbank and speeches later at 2.45pm by parliament.
Corbyn's attendance looks like a last-minute decision, given his name wasn't on lists of speakers even two days ago. According to my colleague Robin McKie, he will attack the Conservative party's leadership on climate change, following a series of green policies being cancelled over the summer, saying "There are no more hugs for the husky, instead it's a passionate embrace for the carbon polluters." 
It's the first time I can think of a leading Labour politician speaking at a big climate march - the most high profile politician is usually Green party MP, Caroline Lucas.
Other speakers from 2.45pm include NUS vice-president, Piers Telemacque, and musician and activist Charlotte Church who is singing with a 12-piece choir.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.08am GMT
block-time published-time 9.43am GMT 
People are gathering in Cape Town's Keizergracht Street. The weather for the march there looks a lot better than London, where 40mph gusts are forecast this afternoon.
enltrThe #CapeClimateMarch crowds are gathering! For the love of our #CoolClimate ! #ClimateMarch#EmissionsMustFallpic.twitter.com/kVLRQ2hlw
 - Cape Climate March (@CTClimateMarch) November 29, 2015
enltrLet's ROLL team! @CTClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/HSvl4Nivpa
 - Greenpop (@GreenpopSA) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 9.34am GMT 
 Summary  
Good morning from London, where march organisers are hoping to beat the turn-out of last year's climate march which attracted around 27,000 people. The march starts at noon (local time) at Park Lane.
In Paris, as Claire pointed out, the planned march was forbidden over security fears. But thousands of shoes have been left in the Place de la Republique as an installation instead, among them a pair with Pope Francis's name on and the the inscription Laudato Si' (Praised be). 
Cardinal Turkson, seen as a potential future Pope, said: 
All members of the Catholic community are warmly invited to offer their support in prayer, word and action. And we're inviting all the bishops and priests around the world to offer the celebration of the Eucharist, on 29 November, for a responsible and successful international conference and summit. We want to encourage the faithful and many others to exercise their ecological citizenship. 
The BBC's David Shukman is at the scene in Paris:
enltrA sea of shoes in Place de la Republique in Paris: protests are banned here so you have to imagine them #COP21pic.twitter.com/AetuepjzAt
 - David Shukman (@davidshukmanbbc) November 29, 2015
Among those who are bringing their shoes is Yeb Sano, the former Philippines climate negotiator who famously broke down in tears at several summits. He's just finished a weeks-long pilgrimage from Rome to Paris for the climate talks - hence the pilgrim shoes. 
enltrPope Francis has reportedly sent his pair of shoes in solidarity with the March of Shoes in Paris tomorrow. I'll bring my pair pilgrim shoes
- Yeb Saño (@YebSano) November 28, 2015
There's also a group of indigenous people meeting in Paris for a 'healing ceremony' in solidarity with those who lost their lives in the recent terror attacks.
enltr"A moment of prayer & a peace offering" - indigenous people coming together for healing ceremony #Paris@g0ldtoothpic.twitter.com/5Ur7wkYm3I
 - 350 dot org (@350) November 29, 2015
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37am GMT
block-time published-time 9.14am GMT 
I'm now handing over the live blog to my colleague Adam Vaughan in London, who'll continue the coverage of marches across the globe today.
Thanks for reading and for all your contributions here, on Twitter and via GuardianWitness.
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
Here are some from readers across the globe:
 Bangladesh      Global Climate March - Bangladesh 
Global Climate March - Bangladesh with representation of BRIT from ACTION/2015!
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By rahatulashekin
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:38 
    Kenya      The climate change March
In Nairobi Kenya the Climate Change march was very successful,we managed to spread the information to the public,we got support from 350.org which to us was a double plus,and I believe the talk in Paris will bear fruits to our planet.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By fred buluku
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:58 
    New Zealand      Young and old Takaka NZ
300 or so Golden Bay citizens marched up ( and then back down) our small main street to voice our concern about Climate Change...to a Govt that so far isn't taking much notice
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Aroha88
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 18:06 
block-time published-time 9.03am GMT 
Which countries are doing the most to stop global warming?
Check out how different nations compare in our interactive:
 Related:  Which countries are doing the most to stop dangerous global warming?
block-time published-time 8.47am GMT 
 Beirut march is underway  
Despite the rain, Lebanese protesters are currently marching the streets of the capital, Beirut:
enltrThe March is still going regardless of the rain #ClimateMarch#peoplesclimate@IndyACTpic.twitter.com/IeSyHxlWk7
 - Safa' Al Jayoussi (@Safaaljayoussi) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 8.25am GMT 
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
Demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes in a sign of solidarity:
enltrOur shoes will march for us. Dawn #MarcheClimat#ClimateMarch#ActInParispic.twitter.com/hSEvhzXjsc
 - Nicole Ghio (@nicoleghio) November 29, 2015
Writing in the Guardian last week, Naomi Klein argued that the banning of the Paris march was silencing the very voices that need to be heard at the climate summit:
For just two weeks every few years, the voices of the people who are getting hit first and worst get a little bit of space to be heard at the place where fateful decisions are made. That's why Pacific islanders and Inuit hunters and low-income people of colour from places like New Orleans travel for thousands of miles to attend. The expense is enormous, in both dollars and carbon, but being at the summit is a precious chance to speak about climate change in moral terms and to put a human face to this unfolding catastrophe.
Even in these rare moments, frontline voices do not have enough of a platform in the official climate meetings, in which the microphone is dominated by governments and large, well-funded green groups. The voices of ordinary people are primarily heard in grassroots gatherings parallel to the summit, as well as in marches and protests, which in turn attract media coverage.
Now the French government has decided to take away the loudest of these megaphones, claiming that securing marches would compromise its ability to secure the official summit zone where politicians will meet. 
 Related:  What's really at stake at the Paris climate conference now marches are banned | Naomi Klein
 Related:  Quel est le véritable enjeu de la conférence sur le climat de Paris maintenant que les manifestations sont interdites ?
block-time published-time 8.14am GMT 
 Summary: Australia marches for climate action  
Climate change rallies rolled on across Australia on Sunday, following well attended protests in Melbourne on Friday and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday.
On Sunday, it was the turn of Sydney, Canberra, Adelaide, Hobart and Perth.
Australia's climate-sensitive neighbours in the Pacific were a key focus for the climate change rally in Sydney, with representatives of communities from Pacific nations - including Tuvalu, Nauru, Kiribati and Tonga - prominent at the front of the march from the Domain to Circular Quay.
More than 40,000 people braved Sydney's heat for the rally on Sunday afternoon, calling on Australia to play a lead role in brokering binding emissions targets for the world to keep global temperature rise below 2C, and to commit to greater domestic emissions cuts than the 26% to 28% the government is currently proposing.
In Canberra, people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate about 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number was closer to 6,000
The Perth event started sombrely. At 3.25pm, at least 5,000 people sat in silence in Hay Street Mall to mark people who have lost their lives, homes and livelihoods to the effects of climate change. The group, in their colour blocks, had marched 2km from Wellington Square and stretched the whole 300-metre length, watched by bemused Christmas shoppers clutching plastic bags and taking photos of the crowd.
The march was led by a group from the Noongar Whadjuk nation and addressed by Christian, Islamic, Jewish, and Hindu faith leaders.
You can read the full report here:
 Related:  Climate change protests across Australia - tens of thousands march
block-time published-time 8.02am GMT 
 South Korea's climate march begins  
The Seoul march is underway, with protesters making use of some inventive props:
    Nuns holding balloons prepare to march during a rally in central Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      Participants holding umbrellas with the message "Well for us, Hell for earth" march in Seoul. Photograph: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters      
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
And of course it's not just Europe that is yet to march: here's a selection of other cities that will be on the move today. Please do get in touch below the line to share details of others you know or are going to. Again, all times are local.
 Durban, South Africa 
10am at Suncoast Boulevard.
 Cape Town, South Africa 
11am from Cape Peninsula University of Technology.
 Beirut, Lebanon 
Leaving Horsh Beirut at 9am, marchers will take the Damascus Road to reach Beirut Downtown at 12.30pm.
 Kampala, Uganda 
9am from Makerere University Freedom Square.
 Seoul, South Korea 
1pm from Cheonggye Square.
 Kiev, Ukraine 
Shevchenko Park at 12.30pm.
You can find more listings here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55am GMT
block-time published-time 7.37am GMT 
 European marches on Sunday: when and where  
As Europe wakes up on Sunday morning, these are the places to keep an eye on - or head to - for climate marches today. All times are local.
 London 
Rally forming from 12 noon at Park Lane - nearest tube Hyde Park Corner & Green Park.
 Berlin 
Midday at central station.
 Madrid 
Midday at Plaza de Cibeles.
 Barcelona 
11.30am at the Via Laietana.
 Rome 
2pm at Piazza Campo de' Fiori.
 Amsterdam 
Midday at Museum Square.
 Copenhagen 
Leaving 1pm from Den Røde Plads Square in Nørrebro to march to the parliament building, Christiansborg.
 Stockholm 
1pm at Norra Latin schoolyard.
 Budapest 
Erzsébet Square at 1pm.
A reminder: you can share your pictures and videos from any of these marches - or any others taking place across the globe - via GuardianWitness or the blue button at the top of the live blog.
block-time published-time 7.16am GMT 
 Japanese campaigners march in Tokyo  
Japan Today reported that around 1,000 people marched in Tokyo on Saturday, but that organisers had hoped for many more:
Some demonstrators were disappointed that the number of participants was not as many as expected, with  Chigusa Okano, a 22-year-old university student in Tokyo, saying: "I especially want young people to show interest in this matter."
 Alex Brodie, a 41-year-old company worker living in Tokyo, said he finds Japanese people's lack of interest in the issue "pathetic".
"Japan needs to wake up. We need to have solar power on every roof top," he said as he marched with his wife and child, while calling on the Japanese government to push for policies to introduce more renewable energy.
The issue of clean, renewable energy has been a key one since a tsunami swamped the Fukushima nuclear plant in 2011, sending three reactors into meltdown.
"Japan must take the lead in the summit to promote renewable energy because Japan is a rare country that has experienced such a big disaster," rally organiser Daigo Ichikawa told AFP news agency.
    Environmentalists hold up placards that read "Climate Action Now!" during a rally in Tokyo on Saturday. Photograph: Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 6.57am GMT 
 Bangladesh march for climate justice  
AFP reports that  more than 5,000 people took part in climate marches on Saturday across 30 different locations in Bangladesh - a country on the front line of climate change, exposed to rising seas, superstorms and expanding deserts.
    People take part in the global climate march in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Saturday. Photograph: KM Asad/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
Unity is the theme of the People's Climate rally in Perth. Led by Noongar Whadjuk MCs, and kicked off with a Whadjuk dance to clear the bad spirits, the crowd then listened in silence to a multi-faith speech led by Perth Anglican assistant Bishop Tom Wilmot.
Wilmot introduced Jewish, Hindu and Sikh leaders and made a point of referring to Rateb Jneid, president of the Islamic Council of Western Australia, as his "brother in the faith", repeating: "And he is my brother."
There has been no mention of the Paris attacks, but the group of more than 1000 people, which has now left Wellington Square to march on the city, will sit for a minute's silence in Hay Street Mall to mark those who have already lost their lives, homes and livelihoods from climate-related events. In particular the minute's silence will honour those affected by bushfires, which have killed six people in Australia this November.
 Kevin Jolley, president of the firefighters' union of WA, said that anyone who had spent time on a fire line knew that the effects of man-made climate change were devastating and real. "There are no sceptics on the end of a fire hose," Jolly said. 
block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
 Philippines climate march  
Activists in the Philippines marched on Saturday, with Rappler reporting that thousands took to the streets across several cities, including the capital, Manila.
Agence France-Presse reported:
Some 3,000 people including religious clergy, students and activists marched through the Philippine capital of Manila demanding curbs on emissions to mute the impact of climate change, which is blamed for a spike in disastrous extreme weather.
"Protect our common home" and "climate justice" were written on the placards held aloft by the surging crowd.
"We want to send a message to the rest of the world, especially the world leaders at the climate talks, to say that our survival is not negotiable," said Denise Fontanilla, spokeswoman for the Asian People's Movement on Debt and Development. 
enltrPhilippines #ClimateMarch video from @inquirerdotnet@KSabilloINQhttps://t.co/jvhZrToakn#ClimateJustice
 - Airah Cadiogan (@eightyseas) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.09am GMT 
The Perth marchers are getting ready to go. (Take a look at this post to get up to speed on the colour-coding.) They have been asked to "stay classy" as they march through the city streets, Calla Wahlquist  reports.
enltrStarting to gather into colour blocks. Need a few photos to fit them all in. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/LQeKP57pLC
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 6.02am GMT 
 Jakarta marches for climate action  
Indonesian president Joko Widodo left Jakarta for Paris this morning. His country has pledged to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 29% by 2030.
But activists say Indonesia could be doing more to reduce its use of fossil fuels.
In September, after months of raging forest fires, Indonesia overtook China and the US to become the world's biggest climate polluter.
    Protesters participate in a climate march in Jakarta on Sunday. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters      
block-time published-time 5.47am GMT 
A reminder: you can contribute to this live blog and our other climate march coverage via GuardianWitness here or the big blue button at the top of this page.
Here are some of the pictures readers have shared so far.
 From Sydney, Australia:      The Ice Cream is Melting 
Sydney Domain, 2015, 29th Nov. Climate Change march
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Valeria Morich
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:32 
    From New Zealand:      Small-town New Zealand rises to the challenge
This parade engaged the creative spirits of a ladies knitting group, a recycle group and puppet makers to express a positive response to the challenges of climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Mairi Jay
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 12:15 
    From Edinburgh, Scotland:      Scotland's Climate March 28 November
Scotland's huge colourful climate march winding down the Mound
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Caitlin Hamlett
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 4:15 
    From Geneva, Switzerland:      Geneva climate march
5000 thousand people attended the climate march in Geneva this Saturday
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By yvwinteler
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 14:22 
    From San Luis Obispo, California, US:      Getting ready to March in San Luis Obispo California
We had about 200 people come out today to create a better world. Our Mayor, framers,and children were amongst our speaking demanding action on climate change.
element-witness--sourceSent via GuardianWitness
element-witness--authorauthorhttp://schema.org/Person By Heidi Harmon
element-witness--date 29 November 2015, 10:44 
block-time published-time 5.33am GMT 
All roads in Sydney's CBD that were closed for the march have now reopened and there are no traffic delays reported.
Safe journey home, Sydney marchers. Keep reading the blog, though. There's plenty more to come ...
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
 Perth march begins  
Noongar Whadjuk man Noel Nannup  gives the welcome, saying: "Our planet is dying." 
Protesters say the fight for the climate can't be separated from the right of Indigenous people to country, Calla Wahlquist reports from the Perth rally.
enltrNoongar spirit dance to clear the bad spirits. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/btF1ovxCEO
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
More than 300 people are gathered in coloured clumps under the trees that line Perth's Wellington Square, ahead of the people's climate rally.
One of those is Gerard Siero, an ecological urbanism researcher at UWA (the University of Western Australia), who is wearing a yellow linen suit and leaning against his folding bike, which collapsed down to a 10kg stick for ease of commuting. He's marching for the solutions to climate change.
"We have all the solutions we need to solve the problem," Siero said. "We don't have the will on behalf of our politicians, but we have the will on behalf of the people.
"What we are really trying to march with today is to let the politicians know that they have to get out of the way."
Siero said Australia had the capacity and technology to switch off carbon, but it was fast running out of time. "We're at the point where if we don't so something it will be too late to do anything but get out the ambulances," he said.
block-time published-time 4.57am GMT 
 Sydney lord mayor: 'at least 45,000 marchers'  
 Clover Moore, Sydney's lord mayor, says these numbers would make today the biggest climate march ever held in the city :
enltrI've just been told by organisers there were at least 45,000 people, making it the biggest climate march ever in Sydney #PeoplesClimate
 - Clover Moore (@CloverMoore) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.49am GMT 
My colleague Calla Wahlquist  is in Perth, where marchers will be setting off in later today:
enltrMore than 100 people have already gathered at Wellington Square, clinging to the shade on the fringe. #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Lu9BkNIvtm
 - Calla Wahlquist (@callapilla) November 29, 2015
We'll be following the progress of that march once it gets underway too, plus you can keep an eye on updates @callapilla.
block-time published-time 4.41am GMT 
With the march in Paris - host of the COP21 climate summit - cancelled after the terrorist attacks of 13 November, activists have turned to other ways of showing their support for the global climate march, Reuters reports:
Activists plan to join arms and form a "human chain" in Paris on Sunday to urge action on global warming, in a muted rally after attacks on the city by Islamic State. 
More than 2,000 climate events are planned in cities including Sydney, Jakarta, Berlin, London, Sao Paulo and New York, making it one of the biggest days of action on climate change in history, organisers say. 
Activists in France scaled back their plans when the government imposed a state of emergency after the attacks two weeks ago killed 130 people, banning the planned demonstration in Paris, meant as the biggest of all. 
In France, activists plan to form a static human chain, formed by about 3,400 people joining arms along what had been the original 3km (1.9 miles) route through central Paris from the Place de la Republique to Place de la Nation. 
"This is a moment for the whole world to join hands," said Iain Keith, campaign director for Avaaz, one of the organisers. 
Separately, more than 10,000 demonstrators who had planned to come to Paris have instead sent shoes to form a big pile in a sign of solidarity. Organisers said the Vatican even sent a pair to represent Pope Francis. 
     Shoes are symbolically placed on a sidewalk in Paris near the Place de la Republique. Photograph: Eric Gaillard/Reuters    
 Alix Mazounie of French Climate Action Network said the activists reckoned a human chain would not violate the state of emergency. 
"This is not civil disobedience," she said. The chain would break, for instance, wherever it crossed a road to avoid disrupting traffic. 
But, underscoring security worries, France put 24 green activists under house arrest before the summit, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve said on Saturday, saying they were suspected of planning violent protests at the talks. 
Foreign minister  Laurent Fabius welcomed the worldwide demonstrations. "It is very positive," Fabius said, for governments to feel public pressure to act.
block-time published-time 4.22am GMT 
While Australian PM  Malcolm Turnbull  heads to Paris for the climate summit, Puppet Malcolm decided to take a turn in the Sydney march:
    A giant Malcolm Turnbull puppet joins tens of thousands of marchers in Sydney's Domain as part of the global people's climate march on Sunday 29 November 2015. Photograph: Janine Israel/Guardian   
And it seems he brought an old, um, pal with him:
undltr @GuardianAuspic.twitter.com/BrQ359YOUn
 - Susan Mackay (@mackaysuzie) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 4.08am GMT 
The Sydney march is well and truly on the move, reports Ben Doherty :
Playing 'Hot, Hot, Hot' as they march down Macquarie St towards the Opera House. Jubilant, boisterous mood.
     Sydney protesters march down Macquarie St in the people's climate march. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 4.05am GMT 
The Canberra march has wrapped up without incident, and ACT Policing has issued Guardian Australia with this statement from operation commander Jo Cameron :
There was a large, well-behaved crowd and it was a peaceful event. There were no arrests and no incidents.
There were some road closures during the march, which were opened as soon as possible.
As you were, Canberra. Carry on with your weekend.
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
My colleague Janine Israel has also been at the Sydney rally, and reports that many Islander and Indigenous communities are represented at the march.
She spoke to members of Australia's Tongan community. One protester told her:
Our islands are drowning. Where are we going to go?
     Members of Australia's Tongan community at the Sydney people's climate march. Photograph: Janine Israel for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.43am GMT 
 What are Australia's climate targets?  
Australia's prime minister,  Malcolm Turnbull, will arrive in Paris later tonight for key international climate talks, armed with a climate target that's lower than many other developed countries.
The Australian government has committed to cutting emissions by 26%-28% of 2005 levels by 2030.
By comparison, the United States has vowed to cut emissions by 26%-28% too - but five years earlier than Australia, by 2025.
Canada has committed to a 30% cut and so has New Zealand, while the European Union has vowed to reduce emissions by 40% of 1990 levels by 2030.
The Labor party released its own targets on Friday. It wants a 45% cut by 2030, a figure Turnbull has criticised as "heroic" and expensive.
But modelling by leading economist Warwick McKibbon, did not find a large difference in the economic impacts of the targets. A reduction of 26% would shave between 0.2% and 0.3% of the GDP, while a 45% reduction would see between 0.5% and 0.7% lost. 
block-time published-time 3.32am GMT 
Helpful reminder for those marching in Sydney right now:
enltrQuick PSA for Sydney: there are water stations dotted around. You should drink some #climatemarch#peopleclimatepic.twitter.com/JC6NySchf8
 - GetUp! (@GetUp) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
The crowds in Sydney have observed one minute's silence to reflect upon those most affected by climate change, ended by the sounding of a didgeridoo.
Many of those there are saying that the Domain - no small space - is almost full to capacity.
Once the speeches and songs are finished, the rally is set to march through the streets of Sydney in colour-coordinated blocks:
yellow for "solutions", eg renewables.
orange for "just transitions", advocating for fair jobs.
red to stand with those already on the front line of climate change.
purple for diversity of faith and cultures.
blue to represent future generations.
white for those in healthcare and science.
blue to stand up for threatened ecosystems.
and a group marching for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The crowd listen to speeches at the Domain in Sydney, Australia, on 29 November 2015 as part of global climate marches in the lead-up to COP 21 in Paris. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian 
block-time published-time 3.10am GMT 
Although it is very hot in Sydney today, with protesters - those who weren't canny enough to bring their umbrellas - seeking out whatever shade they can find, activists are well aware that the real front line against climate change lies further west, in the Pacific islands.
A good primer on that situation is this report by my colleague Oliver Milman :
The cause for concern is clear - Nasa recently reported the world's sea level has risen nearly 8cm since 1992, with the Pacific experiencing a more rapid increase than other oceans.
A rise of around a metre by the end of the century now looks likely. For low-lying islands in the Pacific, this means coastal erosion, saltwater seeping into precious rainwater catchments and ruined crops.
Meanwhile, rising temperatures will heighten the risk of diseases, including those carried by mosquitos. Cyclones are expected to become more severe. The World Health Organisation estimates climate change will cause around 250,000 deaths globally between 2030 and 2050. 
     Pacific Islands will be on the 'frontline' of climate change, the Sydney climate change march is told. Photograph: Ben Doherty for the Guardian      
block-time published-time 3.03am GMT 
My colleague  Ben Doherty is in Sydney's Domain, sheltering from the sun and hearing from Professor Tim Flannery, one of Australia's leading climate change activists, who says today "looks like the largest climate march ever in Australia ".
The Paris talks, he said, are the last chance to save "many things we care about, like the Great Barrier Reef ... We are coming to this issue very late."
There are no easy fixes to the climate problem, he warned, but Australia needs to close down polluting industries and dependence on fossil fuels:
We are meeting in the home city of the Australian prime minister. We need to send a very powerful message to him: do what the people demand.
He said the Australian people would not accept anything less than a successful outcome at Paris. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
It was a very peaceful, family-oriented affair in Canberra, as people brought their children to march with them from Parliament House to the tent embassy, near Old Parliament House.
Police estimate around 3,000 people showed up, while protesters think the number is closer to 6,000. Canberrans are fairly cautious about protesting, as many are public servants and are often reluctant to make political statements.
One of the coordinators of the event, Emma Robinson from the Conservation Council, said she was not surprised that so many showed up in the capital.
"Climate change is and has always been everyone's business," she said. 
The event was staffed by about 80 volunteers, most of whom are Canberra locals who are part of the Conservation Council.
Former chief scientist of Australia, Penny Sackett, said that protests like Sunday's make people feel as though they are taking action on climate change.
"People can become discouraged because it appears as though [political] change does not happen swiftly enough," she told Guardian Australia.
 She said the march was a message from voters to world leaders who are about to meet on climate change in Paris: "We're watching." 
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
The Canberra Times now estimates there are more than 5,000 people taking part in the march there.
enltrThis gives you a better ideas of the numbers marching down from Parliament House, #Canberra. #peoplesclimate#cbrpic.twitter.com/6aNEeVMYVQ
 - Richard Tuffin (@RichardTuffin) November 29, 2015
Attendance numbers are always a tricky thing with marches, with totals from organisers and police often varying wildly.
Police estimates for Melbourne, for example, put the crowd numbers by the end of Friday night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out.
Similarly, estimates for Brisbane on Saturday came in at between 5,000 and 10,000.
We're yet to hear estimates for the Sydney crowd but organisers already seem overwhelmed by the numbers who have shown up so far.
block-time published-time 2.38am GMT 
An enterprising cyclist at the Adelaide rally:
    A cyclist wears a helmet with a solar panel attached as he participates in a march along the main street of Adelaide. Photograph: David Gray/Reuters   
Meanwhile, some Sydney marchers seek out the shade:
enltrToo hot out in the middle! #peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/Y7ejzXipdt
 - Paddy Manning (@gpaddymanning) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
 Sydney is go!  
The Sydney rally is underway, with thousands already in attendance and many more still arriving:
enltrThe power is ours! Yehhhh Sydney! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/BqqlzByULb
 - Greenpeace Aus Pac (@GreenpeaceAustP) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge #greens turnout for #PeoplesClimate !! Rally starting now. pic.twitter.com/laNbMg50Y4
 - Greens NSW (@GreensNSW) November 29, 2015
 Ben Doherty is now in the Domain, from where the march is leaving, and reports "massive numbers":
Much more multi-coloured than the Hyde Park beginnings, people in all manner of colours, lots of associated causes: anti-nuclear, church groups, refugee groups.
One guy has a mallard on his head, and a tree growing out of his backpack.
Sydney lord mayor Clover Moore tells the crowd that COP21 in Paris will be the most important meeting of our lifetime.
"On it depends the future of our planet," she says.
block-time published-time 2.18am GMT 
Hello Hobart! Tasmanian marchers are also assembling, with a minute's silence for Paris, which is hosting this week's climate talks, but - after the terrorist attacks of 13 November - will not be holding its own climate march:
enltrA min of silence for #Paris & imagining a clean, compassionate future in #Hobart at #peoplesclimate march #cop21pic.twitter.com/p57G5JG1Yz
 - Claire Havens (@ClaireHavens) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 2.07am GMT 
My colleague Ben Doherty is with the Sydney marchers and sends this dispatch from the start line:
 At the Sydney march, there are red shirts everywhere. Solid, if not yet spectacular numbers are gathering at the north end of Hyde Park, and marching into the Domain in bright sunshine. 
Labor deputy leader Tanya Plibersek, who brought her own phalanx of rosily-attired Young Laborites, gave a rangy press conference at which she rejected the 'heroic' label Malcolm Turnbull  affixed to Labor's emissions targets (it wasn't meant as a compliment, Plibersek seems to suspect).
She condemned Turnbull for "stopping off on the way to Paris to lecture other heads of government to do more on climate change, while he is doing less".
Plibersek said Labor's targets would require significant change in Australia, but that the country had already seen, and embraced, change aimed at reducing emissions.
She said the $1m Australia has offered to contribute to the Commonwealth's new Climate Finance Access Hub (established at the CHOGM meeting in Valetta) was "pathetically puny".
The hub will be set up to help small island nations vulnerable to climate change access global funds for mitigation and adaptation.
Plibersek said Australia, given its role as a leader in the Pacific region, needed to do more to help its neighbours, some of whom face "an existential threat" from climate change.
 Related:  Turnbull says Shorten's 'heroic' climate target aimed at making political point
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08am GMT
block-time published-time 2.02am GMT 
Sydney marchers are also warming up - as is the weather, with that blue sky deciding to put in an appearance after all - and is expected to be the biggest Australian march of the day. Will NSW be able to best Melbourne's 40,000+ from Friday ?
Reader Tim Senior and friends are well stocked with placards for the Sydney rally:
enltrOn our way to the #peoplesclimate#climatemarch. On public transport of course! pic.twitter.com/FMs5JiOPXZ
 - Tim Senior (@timsenior) November 29, 2015
A reminder: do keep your pictures, videos, thoughts and headcounts coming, to me directly @Claire_Phipps or via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of the blog. Thank you!
block-time published-time 1.53am GMT 
My colleague Shalailah Medhora is at the Canberra march, which has just started. She estimates there are around 3,000 people there so far:
enltrAnd they're off! Around 3,000 on the march to the tent embassy. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/Def0zmsbqz
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
enltr"There are no climate sceptics at the end of a hose". ACT firefighters union at climate rally. @Claire_Phippspic.twitter.com/HYP0ASWQoC
 - Shalailah Medhora (@shalailah) November 29, 2015
I'll be tracking the progress of the Canberra march - along with the others today - on this live blog, plus you can keep an eye on it via @shalailah.
block-time published-time 1.40am GMT 
Many thousands of people marched in New Zealand on Saturday, with more events today: check here for those listings.
An estimated 7,000 turned out in Wellington:
enltr @Claire_Phipps we had a fantastic turn out in Wellington yesterday! #ClimateMarchpic.twitter.com/rFlsGye4YB
 - Torken Faddy (@TFaddy) November 29, 2015
And there were around 15,000 marchers in Auckland, with 8,000 more in Christchurch:
    Protesters of all ages marched in Christchurch, New Zealand, on Saturday. Photograph: PJ Heller/ZUMA Press/Corbis      
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 What is likely to be agreed in Paris?  
We know already what the biggest emitters have committed to:
The EU will cut its emissions by 40%, compared with 1990 levels, by 2030.
The US will cut its emissions by 26% to 28%, compared with 2005 levels, by 2025.
China will agree that its emissions will peak by 2030.
Nations responsible for more than 90% of global emissions have now come up with their targets - known in the UN jargon as intended nationally determined contributions, or INDCs.
These include all of the major developed and developing countries, though their contributions vary: in the case of developed countries, actual cuts in emissions, but for developing countries a range of targets including limits on emissions compared to "business as usual", and pledges to increase low-carbon energy or preserve forests.
Analysis of the INDCS, endorsed by the UN, has suggested that these pledges are enough to hold the world to about 2.7C or 3C of warming. That is not quite enough to meet the scientific advice.
However, that is not the end of the story. One of the key components of any Paris agreement would be to institute a system of review of the emissions targets every five years, with a view to ratcheting them upwards.
Another, and complementary, approach is to make more effort to bring down emissions outside the UN process, for instance by engaging "non-state actors" such as cities, local governments and businesses to do more.
block-time published-time 1.27am GMT 
 Canberra march gets started  
It's Canberra's turn now, and again it looks to be a very healthy turnout under a beautiful blue sky (it's rather grey here in Sydney, not that that should put anyone off):
enltr #peoplesclimate March kicking off in Canberra! pic.twitter.com/d11z8jJYC6
 - Fair Go For Canberra (@FairGoCanberra) November 29, 2015
block-time published-time 1.13am GMT 
 Adelaide march begins  
The Adelaide rally is underway and it's a good turnout, estimated in the thousands:
enltrOver 5000 in #Adelaide marching for jobs, justice & a safe #climate ! #peoplesclimate#climatemarchpic.twitter.com/bn7LsXdm4f
 - AYCC (@AYCC) November 29, 2015
enltrHuge turnout for the #adelaide#peoplesclimate march pic.twitter.com/5eD9KDQWIX
 - Michael Garrod (@MickyJim74) November 29, 2015
enltrMarching for our planet! #climatemarch#adelaide#climatechange#peoplesclimatepic.twitter.com/IPVvmxVTcz
 - Mike Crowhurst (@TheCunningCrow) November 29, 2015
A reminder: you can contribute your own pictures and videos via the blue GuardianWitness button at the top of this live blog, and/or to me @Claire_Phipps.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.13am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
Avaaz, the campaign group behind the march, says more than 120,000 people have already taken part - with thousands of rallies yet to take place on Sunday, the main day of action. 
Thousands of people marched in Brisbane on Saturday - organisers put it at 10,000 - and more in Darwin, following Friday's 40,000-strong rally in Melbourne. 
Organisers said thousands took part in 35 New Zealand locations - the smallest being on Raoul Island, where the island's entire population of seven turned out.
My colleague Melissa Davey was at the Melbourne march on Friday evening and sent this report:
Thousands of people were marching through Melbourne's CBD on Friday evening in what is expected to the largest in a series of climate change protests being held throughout Australia over the weekend.
They gathered in front of the state library and, as the lawns filled with protesters putting finishing touches on their placards, they took to the surrounding roads just in time for peak hour.
Environmentalists, unionists, religious organisations, youth groups, doctors, Indigenous organisations, and people from the aid and development sector were part of the crowd. Police estimates put the crowd numbers by the end of the night at about 40,000, but organisers said 60,000 turned out for the event.
 Related:  Victorians take to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change
block-time published-time 12.56am GMT 
 Why Paris, why now?  
After the terrorist attacks of 13 November, the meeting of world leaders in the French capital beginning on Monday has an added poignancy.
But the COP 21 talks - it stands for conference of the parties, the yearly United Nations climate change conference; this is the 21st - will focus on hammering out a new global agreement to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and with them the threat of climate change.
Here are a couple of key questions answered by the Guardian's environment reporter Fiona Harvey :
 Why now? 
Current commitments on greenhouse gas emissions run out in 2020, so at Paris governments are expected to produce an agreement on what happens for the decade after that at least, and potentially beyond.
 Why is this important? 
Scientists have warned that if greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, we will pass the threshold beyond which global warming becomes catastrophic and irreversible. That threshold is estimated as a temperature rise of 2C above pre-industrial levels, and on current emissions trajectories we are heading for a rise of about 5C.
That may not sound like much, but the temperature difference between today's world and the last ice age was about 5C, so seemingly small changes in temperature can mean big differences for the Earth.
 Will world leaders go to Paris? 
Yes. The heads of state or government of more than 130 countries have already said they will come. These include French president Francois Hollande, Barack Obama of the US, Xi Jinping of China, Narendra Modi of India, Angela Merkel  of Germany, Australia's Malcolm Turnbull, John Key of New Zealand and David Cameron of the UK.
Unlike the Copenhagen talks in 2009, however, at which world leaders turned up at the last minute of the two weeks of talks, this time the leaders will arrive at the beginning of the conference, give their negotiating teams clear instructions, and expect a fully formed agreement at the end of it.
 Related:  Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
block-time published-time 12.48am GMT 
 Marches in Australia  
Some Australian cities have already met and marched, with Melbourne getting in first on Friday evening, and Darwin and Brisbane on Saturday. I'll have reports and pictures from those marches on this live blog shortly, along with news from New Zealand, which held most of its events on Saturday too.
Here's the line-up for today:
 Adelaide : Action started from 11am local (11.30am AEDT) at Ester Lipman Gardens, adjacent to the Torrens Parade Ground. 
 Canberra:  Speakers from 12 midday at Parliament Lawns before the march to the Tent Embassy grounds and West Lawns.
 Sydney : Marchers are asked to gather at 12.30 for a 1pm start from the Domain.
 Hobart : March begins at 1pm from Parliament Lawns.
 Perth : Another 1pm start (4pm AEDT), from Wellington Square.
Plus a heap of other marches - if one can heap a march - in other towns and cities: check out the list on the People's Climate March website. 
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Welcome to live coverage of the global climate march - a continent-spanning series of rallies which organisers hope will see millions of people join to highlight the need for a worldwide consensus on tackling climate change ahead of the COP21 talks in Paris, which open tomorrow.
I'll be kicking off this live blog from Sydney, handing over later to colleagues in London and New York, and aiming to bring you updates from marches in all those places and everywhere in between.
Last year, tens of thousands of people demonstrated in London, Paris, Berlin and Brussels; thousands more turned out in Sydney and Brisbane, with 30,000 thronging the streets of Melbourne. In New York, more than 300,000 marchers took part, on a day of 2,700 simultaneous climate events worldwide.
This year, marchers will not be able to rally in Paris, the home of the climate talks starting on Monday - demonstrations were cancelled in the wake of the 13 November terror attacks. Instead, others have been encouraged by Parisians to #MarchlMe; we'll be keeping an eye on that campaign throughout the day.
If you're taking part in the marches and want to share a story, an observation, a pun or a picture, please do get in touch below the line or give me a shout on Twitter @Claire_Phipps. I'll tweet key developments from there too.
You can also share your pictures and videos of the march via GuardianWitness here or the blue button at the top of the blog, just up there.

Load-Date: November 29, 2015


End of Document




Biden has shown that bold climate action is now common sense. Will UK politicians learn?; His pledge to create millions of well-paid jobs, boost public transport and cut inequality highlights Britain's lack of ambition Matthew Pennycook MP is the shadow minister for climate change
The Guardian (London)
August 3, 2020 Monday 3:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:2
Length: 830 words
Byline: Matthew Pennycook
Highlight: His pledge to create millions of well-paid jobs, boost public transport and cut inequality highlights Britain's lack of ambition Matthew Pennycook MP is the shadow minister for climate change


Body


Throughout the Democratic party presidential primary, candidate Joe Biden was variously chastised for his preference for incrementalism, for declining to fully endorse the Green New Deal, and for his perceived unwillingness to take on fossil fuel interests. Last December, the Sunrise Movement, an influential youth-led activist group that backed Bernie Sanders, graded his primary-season climate plan an F-. Yet even this group had to offer Biden cautious praise last month after he unveiled a plan to invest $2tn in clean energy, jobs and infrastructure in the four years of his first term, should he beat Donald Trump in November's election.
The chances of the plan making it through the US Congress without modification may be low but the boldness of the proposals it sets out is still instructive. The Democratic nominee has committed to eliminating carbon emissions from the power sector of the world's second-largest polluter within 15 years.
In the process, he intends to create millions of well-paying, unionised jobs making wind turbines, building sustainable homes and manufacturing electric vehicles; to construct a new national high-speed rail network and zero-emissions mass transit in every large US city; and to establish a civilian climate corps to plant trees and protect and restore vulnerable ecosystems. And all of this while seeking to tackle racial and economic inequality by directing 40% of the earmarked $2tn to those communities who are disproportionately impacted by pollution and climate breakdown.
That the former vice-president has chosen to put bold climate action at the heart of his presidential bid suggests not only an awareness that prioritising the issue is good politics, but also that the need to rebuild after the coronavirus crisis presents a once-in-a-generation opportunity that can and must be seized for progressive ends. As he argued when launching his plan: "We can live up to our responsibilities, meet the challenges of a world at risk of climate catastrophe, build more climate-resilient communities, put millions of skilled workers on the job and make life markedly better and safer for the American people all at once."
The plan is also a clear indication that a man viewed by many as the consummate centrist Democrat now accepts that averting runaway global heating requires a fundamental reshaping of the US economy rather than mere tinkering around the edges, and that both the speed and scale of climate action matter. By comparison, the climate proposals that formed part of Hillary Clinton's 2016 presidential campaign, considered "ambitious" just four years ago, amounted to just $90bn of investment - about a 20th of what Biden is now promising. That his commitment to a $2tn programme - approximately one-eighth of US federal spending - delivered over the course of a single presidential term, is now viewed as a moderate response to the climate crisis illustrates just how far the centre ground has shifted on this issue.
In the emphasis it places on the opportunities presented by the green transition, Biden's plan is also rooted in a recognition that forging a broad consensus for transformative change requires climate action to be as much about retaining and creating decent jobs and addressing economic, racial, generational and regional inequalities as it is about cuts to greenhouse gas emissions. Biden does not shy away from the hard truth that climate breakdown represents an "existential threat", but his agenda remains relentlessly optimistic, clothed in the language of the labour movement and progressive politics: innovation, technological progress, job creation and the pursuit of equality.
Biden's plan - and the fact it has won praise from environmentalist groups and trade unions alike - has not come from nowhere. It is the product of years of painstaking work within the Democratic party and beyond: of listening to communities' hopes and fears, building coalitions and establishing trust, and developing and testing policies. And it points to the task ahead for the labour and environmental movements here at home.
It is also far from perfect, not least in that it conspicuously avoids confronting many of the more difficult trade-offs that lie ahead and fails to engage with the obvious need to rapidly divest from fossil fuels. Yet for all its flaws, Biden's plan serves to highlight the UK government's lack of climate ambition. As the host of next year's critical COP26 climate summit, Britain's ministers need to raise their game.
The fact that the candidate currently favourite to be the next US president is determined to seize this historic moment, has committed himself to a dramatic acceleration in the pace and scale of climate action, and is advocating rapid decarbonisation as the means to achieve social justice, national renewal and international leadership, illustrates that a bold climate agenda is now basic common sense.
 Matthew Pennycook MP is the shadow minister for climate change

Load-Date: August 3, 2020


End of Document




The unseen driver behind the migrant caravan: climate change; While violence and poverty have been cited as the reasons for the exodus, experts say the big picture is that changing climate is forcing farmers off their land - and it's likely to get worse
The Guardian(London)
October 30, 2018 Tuesday 5:30 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 1299 words
Byline: Oliver Milman in New York, Emily Holden in Washington and David Agren in Huixtla, Mexico
Body


Thousands of Central American migrants trudging through Mexico towards the US have regularly been described as either fleeing gang violence or extreme poverty.
But another crucial driving factor behind the migrant caravan has been harder to grasp: climate change.
Most members of the migrant caravans come from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador - three countries devastated by violence, organised crime and systemic corruption, the roots of which can be traced back to the region's cold war conflicts.
Experts say that alongside those factors, climate change in the region is exacerbating - and sometimes causing - a miasma of other problems including crop failures and poverty.
And they warn that in the coming decades, it is likely to push millions more people north towards the US.
"The focus on violence is eclipsing the big picture - which is that people are saying they are moving because of some version of food insecurity," said Robert Albro, a researcher at the Center for Latin American and Latino Studies at American University.
"The main reason people are moving is because they don't have anything to eat. This has a strong link to climate change - we are seeing tremendous climate instability that is radically changing food security in the region."
Migrants don't often specifically mention "climate change" as a motivating factor for leaving because the concept is so abstract and long-term, Albro said. But people in the region who depend on small farms are painfully aware of changes to weather patterns that can ruin crops and decimate incomes.
Pausing for a rest as the first of the three recent migrant caravans passed through the Mexican town of Huixtla last week, Jesús Canan described how he used to sow maize and beans on a hectare of land near the ancient Copán ruins in western Honduras.
An indigenous Ch'orti' Maya, Canan abandoned his lands this year after repeated crop failures - which he attributed to drought and changing weather patterns. "It didn't rain this year. Last year it didn't rain," he said softly. "My maize field didn't produce a thing. With my expenses, everything we invested, we didn't have any earnings. There was no harvest."
Desperate and dreaming of the United States, Canan hit the road in early October and joined the migrant caravan. He left behind a wife and three children - ages 16, 14 and 11 - who were forced to abandon school because Canan couldn't afford to pay for their supplies.
"It wasn't the same before. This is forcing us to emigrate," he said. "In past years, it rained on time. My plants produced, but there's no longer any pattern [to the weather]."
US Customs and Border Patrol data shows a surge in outward migration from western Honduras, a prime coffee-producing area, said Stephanie Leutert, an expert in Central American migration and security at the University of Texas.
Many of those are farmers or agricultural workers who take to the road when coffee-growing is no longer profitable - such as Antonio Lara, 25, from the Honduran city of Ocotepeque, who joined the caravan with his wife and children, aged six and 18 months. "Coffee used to be worth something, but it's been seven years since there was a decent price," he said. Lara said he thought that changing weather patterns had a lot to do with the problem, though he also blamed his plight on greedy bosses and coffee dealers. "I didn't leave my country because I wanted to. I left because I had to," he said.
A third of all employment in Central America is linked to agriculture, so any disruption to farming practices can have devastating consequences.
Since around 2012, coffee plants across Central America have been ravaged by an epidemic called leaf rust, which according to some estimates has affected 70% of farms.
Normally, the fungus dies when temperatures drop in the evening but warmer nights are allowing it to thrive, said Sam Dupre, a researcher at the University of Maryland Baltimore County.
The impact of climate change on the fungus remains in debate, but Dupre said the situation in Guatemala "shows even without a direct climate change link what happens when these global commodities fail".
"One of the things I found was that people, largely because they weren't able to pay their debts, to get money for food, they started to migrate," Dupre said. "People were telling me before the coffee leaf rust hit, we didn't migrate. Now we do. It's normal."
A study of Central American migrants by the World Food Program last year found that nearly half described themselves as food insecure. The research found an increasing trend of young people moving as a result of knock-on poverty and lack of work.
Climate change is bringing more extreme and unpredictable weather to the region: summer rainfall is starting later and has become more irregular. Drought fuelled by El Niño has gripped much of Central America over the past four years, but the period has been occasionally punctuated by disastrous flooding rains. 
As a result, more than 3 million people have struggled to feed themselves.
"Coffee and maize are sensitive to temperature and rainfall changes," said Albro. "If a coffee crop fails you can't just turn on a dime and do something else, it takes a long time to recover. There have been several lost crops in a row and it's caused tremendous hardship for small-scale farming."
Farmers first migrate to urban areas, where they confront a new set of problems, which in turn prompt them to consider an international odyssey.
"There's an internal movement where someone will go to, say, Guatemala City and then perhaps get extorted by a gang and then move to the US," said Leutert. "When they get here they will say they've moved because of violence - but climate change was the exacerbating factor."
More than 50,000 Guatemalan families were apprehended trying to cross the US border in the year to October, double the number of the previous year, according to US Customs and Border Protection.
People move for a tangle of different reasons, and climate change's influence is often far-reaching and yet hard to measure, but the World Bank estimates that warming temperatures and extreme weather will force an estimated 3.9 million climate migrants to flee Central America over the next 30 years.
This mass movement of people risks destabilising their home countries and presents a challenge for destinations such as the US. The 1951 UN refugee convention sets out clear criteria for the granting of asylum, such as persecution and war, but climate change is not on the list.
With an estimated 150 million to 300 million climate refugees set to be displaced worldwide by 2050, a new international framework will be needed to accommodate them.
"If your farm has been dried to a crisp or your home has been inundated with water and you're fleeing for your life, you're not much different from any other refugee," said Michael Doyle, an international relations scholar at Columbia University. "The problem is that other refugees fleeing war qualify for that status, while you don't."
Doyle is part of a group of academics and advocates pushing for a new treaty that would focus on the needs of displaced people, rather than their exact reason for leaving, in order to cover the expected wave of climate migrants.
Any reform of the landmark refugee agreement is "quite unlikely at present", Doyle said, due to the complexity of such a new arrangement, as well as the rise of nationalist governments in places such as the US.
"The president of the US is using migrant caravans as a political wedge issue as a way to get elected," Doyle said. "If we reopen the 1951 convention, it's more likely to be weakened than strengthened. We aren't in a state where reforms, however sensible, can be made. There just isn't the global statesmanship at the moment, nowhere near it."

Load-Date: October 30, 2018


End of Document




Australian natural disasters minister David Littleproud: 'I don't know if climate change is manmade'; Minister tells Guardian he is unsure of causes of crisis, saying he wants farmers to have tools to adapt to changeAustralian natural disasters minister's complete about face: 'I believe in climate science'
The Guardian(London)
September 10, 2019 Tuesday 6:52 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:3
Length: 902 words
Byline: Paul Karp
Body


Australia's minister responsible for drought and natural disasters, David Littleproud, has said that he doesn't "know if climate change is manmade".
Clarifying earlier comments that the question is "irrelevant" when considering the Coalition government's response to intensifying bushfires, he told Guardian Australia he was unsure about the causes of the climate crisis but wanted to give the country the tools to adapt.
The remarks by the minister for water resources, drought, natural disaster and emergency management are likely to anger political opponents, including the Greens who have targeted Littleproud and fellow members of the National party for refusing to acknowledge a link between human-induced climate change and bushfires.
Littleproud's position was supported by the Nationals deputy leader, Bridget McKenzie, the minister for resources and northern Australia, Matt Canavan, and the environment minister, Sussan Ley, all of who denied knowledge of or downplayed the link.
Early spring bushfires in Queensland may go on for weeks, authorities said, while firefighters on Tuesday were battling more than 50 fires in New South Wales. The overall fire danger index has increased for most of southern Australia over the past 40 years and the Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre says the trend is expected to continue.
On Monday, Littleproud told ABC's Radio National that Australia has been "adapting to a changing climate since we first settled this country and we'll have to continue to do that and do that with the best science we've got available".
When asked whether human-induced climate change is making bushfires more intense, Littleproud replied: "We're adapting to it as the climate continues to change and we'll continue to equip our service workers ... Whether it's manmade or not is irrelevant."
The minister suggested there were "extremes from both sides" of the debate which should be about "do we want to breathe healthy air". He said his job was to ensure emergency services "are given the tools and resources they need, [and] they have the science to understand that these events could become more severe".
Asked by Guardian Australia why he had avoided taking a position on the effect of manmade climate change, Littleproud replied: "I don't know if climate change is manmade.
"I'm about practical outcomes, whether that's about having a cleaner environment or giving farmers and emergency services the right tools to adapt," he said.
"I am responsible for making sure we have the tools we need to adapt to a changing climate."
On Monday, the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, used Senate question time to target Littleproud for his original answer, suggesting he was in effect dismissing the concerns of emergency services chiefs who have warned of climate change's contribution to fires.
The agriculture minister, Bridget McKenzie, rebuked Di Natale for "politicising bushfires which right now are affecting landholders, homes, environmental assets and farmers in communities in Queensland and north-east NSW".
McKenzie - answering on behalf of Littleproud - said the minister and she had been "very upfront ... about the fact that the climate is changing". "There is variability around the climate."
Asked if she accepted that human-induced climate change is making bushfires worse, McKenzie replied: "Our government has made very clear that we take climate change seriously."
On Tuesday Di Natale repeated the tactic - this time targeting Canavan, who again accused the Greens of using the tragedy in "combustible fashion" to further the party's own political cause.
Canavan quoted a NSW environment department report which suggested there was "considerable uncertainty" of the impact of climate change on bushfire risk, although the report concluded it will likely increase bushfire risk.
Canavan said the Liberal-National Coalition supported "sensible responses to climate change that included support for the high-quality coal and gas that we produce in this country". "It is through the high-quality production of energy that we will respond to climate change and reduce emissions," he said.
Ley told ABC Radio that she doesn't know "what caused this particular fire on this particular day".
"We have always lived on a continent which has been ravaged by fires, I am not going to become an expert on what is causing the fires," she said.
"I am sure it is related to climate change, to what degree and under what circumstances, and what actions we could be taking, there is a whole range of other conversations around that."
Earlier on Tuesday, four Coalition MPs raised the issue of drought and natural disasters in the joint party room, urging practical options to help regional businesses including shops that are not eligible for drought assistance.
Several others raised the issue of insurance in north Queensland, which is subject to monsoonal troughs and severe tropical cyclones. The MPs complained of exorbitant premium rises of between 300% and 500% and argued the situation is a market failure with insurers warning it is no longer profitable to insure areas including Townsville.
The MPs suggested reducing regulatory barriers to encourage smaller insurers or mutuals to offer insurance. Scott Morrison directed the assistant treasurer, Michael Sukkar, to meet northern Queensland MPs; Sukkar said he was already working with the competition regulator on the issue.

Load-Date: September 16, 2019


End of Document




As fires burn the west, top Democrats stay quiet on the climate crisis; Nancy Pelosi has been notably tepid on green legislation - so are the Democrats serious about fighting climate change?
The Guardian (London)
September 12, 2020 Saturday 9:30 AM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1336 words
Byline: Emily Holden in Washington and agencies
Highlight: Nancy Pelosi has been notably tepid on green legislation - so are the Democrats serious about fighting climate change?


Body


With hundreds of thousands of Americans forced to evacuate their homes in the western US, Donald Trump hasn't said a word about the wildfires blazing across multiple states in nearly three weeks.
But some national Democratic leaders also have been slow to call attention to the fires in California, Oregon and Washington which have killed more than 20, forced millions to breathe ash from orange-tinted skies that are blocking out the sun, and seen hundreds of thousands of people flee their homes.
Climate activists say the tepid political response, particularly from the Democratic House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, is yet another sign that US politicians are far from ready to take concrete steps to deal with the realities of climate change, let alone write laws to stop burning fossil fuels in order to slow its effects.
Another four years of Trump in office would devastate the international climate movement, but even a Democratic-controlled government is not guaranteed to substantially address the crisis.
Last week, Pelosi barely mentioned the fires, which are ravaging her own home state of California, until Thursday, when she was asked about them on MSNBC and in a weekly press conference.
In a 17-minute update for reporters, she spoke of the fires - which are being made worse by human-induced climate change - just briefly before speaking at length about what she sees as Republicans' failed response to the coronavirus.
When asked if Democrats would pursue major climate change legislation immediately if they win control of Congress and the White House, Pelosi gave a jumbled answer.
"Well, we will have ... we will have, obviously, hopefully, the Covid pandemic will have subsided - if there's any thought that the Republicans in Congress will pay attention to science," she said.
"Right now they're in a place where they don't believe in science and they don't like governance. So they don't want any reason to have to govern, to call for standards to defeat the virus ... but the virus, of course - in other words, to open up our schools and our economy - has to be first and foremost. But yes, it will be an early part of the agenda."
Pelosi added that climate change has long been her "flagship issue", spoke of a 2005 energy law she helped pass, and noted House Democrats have drafted a climate report.
Pelosi's spokesman, Henry Connelly, pointed to Pelosi's comments about the wildfires and climate change in interviews and press conferences two weeks ago, on 26 and 27 August. He said under her leadership the House had made it a priority to pass climate-focused legislation and noted she was convening the heads of parliament of G7 nations this weekend on the climate crisis and economic and environmental justice.
However, Pelosi has previously mocked the Green New Deal - a progressive proposal for large-scale spending to fight inequity and the climate crisis simultaneously - calling it the "green dream".
So has Dianne Feinstein, the senior Democratic senator for California, who last year told children who came to her office to ask her to commit to a Green New Deal that she disagreed with the plan, including because there was "no way to pay for it".
Feinstein, in a recent op-ed, linked the more intense fires to climate change and called for policy changes to help communities prepare for and fight fires. But she did not write about any policies to halt rising emissions.
"You look up at the sky and you wonder. It's not just the Republicans who are letting us down. It's the Democrats who aren't fighting for a better climate future either," said Rebecca Katz, a progressive political consultant and founder of New Deal Strategies. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has said that climate delaying is the same as climate denial. And it's hard not to see that point crystal clear on a morning like today."
Joe Biden has a $2tn plan to try to virtually eliminate climate emissions by 2050, but he reiterates frequently that he would not try to ban fracking - the process that has fueled a gas drilling boom in the US. In doing so, he has earned the support of some reticent labor unions.
"The Biden campaign understands that a full embrace of an aggressive climate change agenda could create problems for them in the upper midwest," said Dan Schnur, who served as an adviser to the former California governor Pete Wilson and Arizona senator John McCain. "Trump has shown no desire to talk about California beyond using it as a liberal punching bag to make his case to his conservative base."
On Thursday, Biden's campaign tweeted a video of the destruction and said: "Make no mistake: climate change is already here - and we're witnessing its devastating effects every single day.
"We have to get President Trump out of the White House and treat this crisis like the existential threat that it is."
Sabrina Singh, a spokeswoman for Kamala Harris, said Biden and Harris "have been closely monitoring the wildfires raging across the state and highlighting the urgent need to address the threat of climate change".
Barack Obama also tweeted photos of a glowing, smoke-filled San Francisco and told followers to "vote like your life depends on it - because it does".
That's compared to Trump, who has held 46 public events since 23 August where he could have addressed the wildfires but did not, according to a review by the group Climate Power 2020.
Asked why he has not done so, the White House spokesman Judd Deere said Trump was "closely monitoring" the fires and had sent federal funding and personnel to help states fight them. Deere flagged a tweet noting Trump spoke with California's governor, Gavin Newsom, to "express his condolences for the loss of life and reiterate the administration's full support to help those on the frontlines of the fires".
The high-profile Democratic nods to the climate crisis are an improvement over just years ago, when the issue was barely touched upon in presidential debates. Yet activists say it is not enough. The planet is already 1C hotter than before industrialization. It is on track to become at least 3C hotter. The wildfire season is expanding, and climate-fueled drought is making the fires more dangerous. Stronger hurricanes are ripping apart Gulf coast communities. Iowa and other midwest states are still reeling from a derecho.
"It's unfortunate, given that the speaker's own district is being impacted by what's going on right now," said Anthony Rogers-Wright, policy coordinator of the Climate Justice Alliance.
"There are far too many in Democratic leadership who believe that climate change is a wedge issue. When what it really is is an issue that if articulated correctly could bring everyone together."
On Thursday, the Climate Justice Alliance joined "a coalition of grassroots groups, labor unions, Black, Brown and Indigenous leaders" to back a congressional resolution aimed at "creating nearly 16m good jobs, reviving our economy, and addressing the interlocking crises of climate change, racial injustice, public health, and economic inequity".
Without saying the words "Green New Deal", the measure's goals are closely aligned.
The resolution has sponsors from across the Democrat political spectrum: senators Chuck Schumer, Ed Markey, Cory Booker and Elizabeth Warren; and Representatives Deb Haaland, Debbie Dingell, Donald McEachin, Sheila Jackson Lee, Raul Grijalva, Rosa DeLauro, Brendan Boyle, Barbara Lee, Ilhan Omar and Ro Khanna.
In a virtual press conference on Thursday, the Democratic senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon spoke of the "almost apocalyptic moment" in his state.
He blamed an influx of "dark money" from the fossil fuel industry in political campaigns, saying their contributions brought the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, to power.
"We are seeing the regular arrival of larger, more intense disasters that are absolutely consistent with what happens when you have a warmer planet," Merkley said. "We have to now translate that into a determined, hopefully bipartisan, effort to have a bold, massive undertaking to address it."

Load-Date: September 14, 2020


End of Document




Great Barrier Reef faces dire threat with 2C global warming, UN report says; Distinct difference in amount of coral that would remain under two climate change scenariosIPCC climate change report calls for urgent action to phase out fossil fuels - live
The Guardian(London)
October 8, 2018 Monday 2:11 AM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:2
Length: 1273 words
Byline: Adam Morton
Body


Limiting global warming to 1.5C rather than 2C would likely be the difference between the survival of some Great Barrier Reef coral and its complete decline, according to the latest United Nations assessment of climate change science.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change special report on the impact of global warming of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, released in South Korea on Monday, found coral reefs were likely to decline between 70% and 90% if the temperature increased to that level. If global warming reaches 2C, more than 99% of coral reefs were projected to decline.
Scientists said it underlined the need for urgent global action to cut greenhouse gas emissions - including a rapid withdrawal of coal-fired electricity, a shift that would have major implications not only for Australia's power grid, but one of its largest export industries.
Professor Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, a coordinating lead author on the report and a coral reefs expert with the University of Queensland, said there was a distinct difference in the amount of coral that would remain under the two warming scenarios.
"Going to 2C and above gets to a point where corals can no longer grow back, or you have annual bleaching events. On the other hand, at 1.5C there's still significant areas which are not heating up or not exposed to the same levels of stress such that they would lose coral, and so we're fairly confident that we would have parts of those ecosystems remaining," he said in a briefing to journalists before the report was made public.
While the report does not break down the impact of warming by regions, Australian scientists highlighted several areas where there were clear differences between 1.5 and 2C. Others included the relative risk of drought in the south, river flows, the retreat of snow and ice in alpine areas and the scale of disruption in fisheries as marine species moved south to cooler waters.
It found it not too late to avoid 1.5C, but time was limited. Global emissions rose 1.6% in 2017 after three years of flatlining. The world is considered on track for between 3 and 4C by 2100.
Reaching the goal would likely involve the use of coal for electricity across the globe being cut by between 59% and 78% by 2030 and 73% and 97% by 2050, compared with 2010 levels.
Professor Peter Newman, from the Curtin University Sustainability Policy Institute and a lead author of a chapter of the report on the global response to the climate change threat, said he expected coal would            rapidly phase out of the Australian power grid but the country was yet to appreciate            what was in store for exports.
"The kind of exports that we're having will be phased out. We need to get that in our perceptions of the future - that coal cannot be a major part of our export future. It's not going to have anything like the ability to compete with solar and wind particularly, and we need to adapt out economy accordingly," he said. "It is going to happen in India, it's already happening in China."
The report is likely to increase pressure on the Australian government to explain how it will meet its pledge of a 26-28% cut in national emissions below 2005 levels by 2030. It has been accused of having no policies to meet the target since walking away from a pledge to introduce a policy to cut emissions from the electricity sector. National emissions            have risen each year since former prime minister Tony Abbott abolished the carbon price introduced under Julia Gillard.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he was focused on reducing power prices, and would not increase Australia's emissions target. Labor has pledged to make a 45% cut by 2030, in part by boosting the share of renewable energy to 50%. On Sunday, the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said: "If you don't care about doing the right thing by the environment, then you actually have no right to be the government of Australia."
The IPCC spent two years on the report following a request by the world's governments at the 2015 climate conference in Paris, where 195 countries signed up to an historic agreement to keep the global temperature rise this century well below 2C and - following urging by low-lying island nations and vulnerable developing countries - to pursue efforts to limit the increase to 1.5C.
Citing more than 6,000 scientific references, the panel found limiting warming to 1.5C would require rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society. It says achieving it would have clear benefits for human health and nature and, compared with 2C, help ensure a more sustainable and equitable society.
It is estimated there has already been 1C of warming, overwhelmingly due to human activities that produce greenhouse gases. The world is already seeing and feeling the consequences, including increased extreme weather, rising sea levels and reducing sea ice cover in the Arctic. At the current rate of warming, the world is considered likely to reach 1.5C warming between 2030 and 2052.
Professor Mark Howden, a review editor for the report and the director of the Australian National University's Climate Change Institute, said: "We need new technologies, energy efficiency, clean energy sources, less deforestation, better land management, sustainable agriculture and many other things. The good news is there's actually movement in the right direction in many of those areas, but we need to do more and faster if we are to keep to 1.5C or even 2C."
Howden said 2C warming would mean significantly increased risk of drought, particularly in Australia's southern half. Expected reduced rainfall would reduce soil moisture while the higher temperature would increase evaporation, depleting the soil more quickly and more rapidly triggering droughts that would tend to be more intense and last longer. He said river flows in south-east and south-west Australia tended to fall linearly as temperatures increased.
Hoegh-Guldberg said corals on the reef faced not only warming waters but ocean acidification, which slowed the pace at which they could form skeletons, affecting the ability to recover from extreme events. There has been a 26% increase in acidity since the pre-industrial period. "It is a really major change in the way ocean systems are working," he said. "The problem with ocean codification is it takes about 10,000 years to correct in terms of the ocean receiving alkaline material from the continents ... so it is here to stay."
Newman gave Australia a varying scorecard in its efforts in responding to the issue compared with other countries. On energy transformation, he said Australia was showing quite rapid progress comparable with the rest of the world due to the disruptive effect of solar and wind energy. On urban systems, there were examples of how to do zero carbon development in place, such as the White Gum Valley in Perth where renewable energy was shared to make housing cheaper, though the approach was yet to be mainstreamed. On the land, there were good signs of reforesting to capture emissions. But on industry and transport, Australia's performance on emissions was poor.
To reach 1.5C, the report found global emissions would need to fall by about 45% below 2010 levels by and be "net zero" by about 2050. Any remaining emissions would need to be balanced by removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
Going past 1.5C warming - described as "overshooting" - would mean a greater reliance on techniques that remove carbon dioxide from the air. The effectiveness of these techniques is unproven at large scale and may carry significant risks. The IPCC found it meant the decisions made today were critical.

Load-Date: October 8, 2018


End of Document




Coalition grilled on regional jobs package - as it happened; The Senate-only sitting week has started in the midst of a debate on climate change as 'catastrophic' blazes threaten swathes of NSW and Queensland. All the day's events, live Follow all the latest news on NSW and Queensland bushfires - live
The Guardian(London)
November 10, 2019 Sunday 9:18 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:17
Length: 5880 words
Byline: Amy Remeikis
Body


block-time published-time 5.01am GMT 
On that note, we are going to wrap up the blog for the day.
But we'll back tomorrow morning for day two of Senate-palooza.
No doubt we will still be talking about whether or not we are allowed to discuss causes for worsening natural disasters tomorrow, because this is after all, Australian politics.
For those in the fire zone, please stay safe. For those fighting those fires, thank you.
In the meantime - take care of you. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.05am GMT
block-time published-time 4.32am GMT 
Someone is having fun.
enltrSTATEMENT | Nationals kill dairy rescue bill. Senator Pauline Hanson's private senator's bill to introduce a minimum farm gate price for milk has been defeated by 31 votes to 30. #auspol           #qldpol           https://t.co/lXoeaHjP3Q
 - Pauline Hanson ???? (@PaulineHansonOz) November 11, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.54am GMT
block-time published-time 4.22am GMT 
enltrBreaking: Norwegian oil giant, Equinor has had their environmental & safety plan to drill in the Great Aust Bight rejected. The risk of an oil spill is too big and the damange to local fishing & tourism jobs too great. It's time to protect the Bight from big oil once and for all
- Sarah Hanson-Young?? (@sarahinthesen8) November 11, 2019
block-time published-time 4.20am GMT 
 Rachel Siewert  is asking  Michaelia Cash  what happened to the 104,480 who have dropped out of income support - and whether or not she can confirm they have jobs, or any form of income.
Cash says there were many reasons, but doesn't give an answer.
Senate question time ends, and so does my will to keep standing. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.27am GMT
block-time published-time 4.08am GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie REALLY likes the line "we are standing with you" when it comes to farmers.
Really, really likes it.
block-time published-time 4.00am GMT 
Apologies for the dairy/diary typos. 
But you try listening to this guff without your entire being glazing over.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.04am GMT
block-time published-time 3.58am GMT 
enltrOn Wednesday Pell will either be told it's the end of the road, or that his appeal will be heard [likely some time next year]. The High court will deliver its decision on whether he will be granted leave to appeal his convictions at 9.30am.
- Melissa Davey (@MelissaLDavey) November 11, 2019
block-time published-time 3.56am GMT 
"I'm sorry Senator Hanson, I forgot you were actually new to this issue, so let me walk you through it,"  Bridget McKenzie  says.
Someone get the aloe vera. 
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
 Pauline Hanson is now asking Bridget McKenzie  about the exposure draft for the dairy code.
This would be the issue that One Nation has seemingly taken over from the Nationals, leaving the Nationals rather annoyed. 
Hanson put through a bill today for regulation of the industry, which was lost after the Nationals voted against it (Centre Alliance was absent from the vote) so she lost it by one.
Hanson is very much enjoying how discomforted this is leaving McKenzie. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.55am GMT
block-time published-time 3.49am GMT 
This is becoming the Bridget McKenzie hour, which is wayyyyy too much Bridget McKenzie.
She is basically taking every single question on notice. Which includes why Moira council found out from the media it was no longer getting the $1m drought funding it thought it was, after a miscommunication between Damian Drum and the water minister.
McKenzie can't tell you much about that. But she can tell you that it is a "great program".
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56am GMT
block-time published-time 3.46am GMT 
Can you be a raving inner city greenie lunatic, if you are from Michael McCormack's  electorate? Asking for a friend. 
enltrJoin us at 8am tomorrow Tuesday 12th at Michael McCormacks office #wagga for a 20 minute Bushfire Silent Vigil to stand with those affected by the            #ClimateCrisis -induced bushfires and tell our government to stop pretending!            @ap4ca           @gabriellechan           pic.twitter.com/eQgYrAosJ7
 - em_n (@em_n2019) November 11, 2019
block-time published-time 3.41am GMT 
Honestly, I would prefer to eat a bunch of bananas then sit through this.
block-time published-time 3.40am GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie just had a bit of a fraudian slip with the term "climate reduction fund" instead of emissions reduction fund as she answers a question from Larissa Waters.  
I mean, at least it is honest. 
McKenzie now accuses Waters of using the "misery of those in regional NSW and Queensland for your political advantage."
Oh that'll fix it. 
block-time published-time 3.35am GMT 
We are now hearing a dixer on how the parliament and government will be acknowledging Remembrance Day.
Which occurred at 10.30am.
block-time published-time 3.34am GMT 
enltrSenators @MathiasCormann           @SenatorWong and            @larissawaters address the            #senate on the bushfires            @murpharoo           @mpbowers           @AmyRemeikis           pic.twitter.com/XMRuxBOezH
 - Lyndal Curtis (@lyndalcurtis) November 11, 2019
block-time published-time 3.33am GMT 
Asked more questions on the Regional Jobs and Investment Packages issues, Bridget McKenzie  says she will take the questions on notice "and that is all I can really do".
Even Penny Wong cracks a smile at that one. 
Strangely, McKenzie doesn't seem to have anything prepared on this, despite the auditor-general report basically calling it a trash fire, meaning her staff are now madly sending her sheets of information via the Senate clerks.
block-time published-time 3.29am GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie says "we are the first government to put real money on the table" to help prepare for the next drought.
"That is how you [deal] for a drought, you plan for the next one now... we are the first government in history to do that." 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.34am GMT
block-time published-time 3.25am GMT 
 Nita Green gets the first question - on the Regional Jobs and Investment Packages program that  Sarah Martin and Paul Karp have been writing about. 
 Bridget McKenzie  is taking all the questions on notice. 
You can find some of the problems with that scheme here: 
 Related:  Tasmanian cafe and Victorian bike path breach Coalition's regional grant scheme
And here
 Related:  Bus and ferry project that received $1m Coalition regional grant delayed and 'losing money'
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.28am GMT
block-time published-time 3.16am GMT 
 Bridget McKenzie  says her "thoughts and prayers" are with the communities facing the fire emergency. 
block-time published-time 3.15am GMT 
 Larissa Waters  says on the fires that "we cannot say that we weren't warned this was going to happen" and mentions a 2006 CSIRO report handed to the John Howard  government, talking about the danger of fires becoming worse by 2020 because of a changing climate.
"We need more than thoughts and prayers to keep Australian communities safe," Waters says. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.21am GMT
block-time published-time 3.11am GMT 
 Penny Wong says that individual weather events can't be linked to the fires, but trends can, and Australia needs a plan to deal with what is coming in the future. 
block-time published-time 3.07am GMT 
The defence minister has authorised all local base commanders for the armed forces to respond where they can during the fire emergencies.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.08am GMT
block-time published-time 3.02am GMT 
Senate question time begins with an acknowledgement of the fires and a thank you to fire fighters. 
block-time published-time 2.55am GMT 
We are just a few minutes away from Senate question time.
I am finding it very hard to contain my excitement.
On another note, I hate bananas (it's a consistency thing) but I still force myself to eat them, because they are so good for you and I kinda feel like I have to. 
Senate question time is a lot like eating a banana. 
block-time published-time 2.50am GMT 
There is a cross-parliamentary working group, which includes George Christensen and Andrew Wilkie, looking to see  Julian Assange before his extradition hearing.
They are still waiting on permission from the UK government. 
enltrFree Julian Assange banner hoisted above Parliament House today https://t.co/5D57I76epk
 - rob harris (@rharris334) November 11, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.51am GMT
block-time published-time 2.45am GMT 
The final division on Pauline Hanson's  dairy bill was just held - she lost 
Ayes 30
Noes 31
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.47am GMT
block-time published-time 2.34am GMT 
That Senate chamber light.
enltrThe passing sun lights up the poppy on Senator Hanson's jacket. #senate           @AmyRemeikis           @mpbowers           @murpharoo           pic.twitter.com/EqEPsyKaHQ
 - Lyndal Curtis (@lyndalcurtis) November 11, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.37am GMT
block-time published-time 2.15am GMT 
Labor is supporting this, but the government is not.
enltrPauline Hanson reacts when LNP Senator Susan McDonald reveals she will not be supporting her Protecting Australian Dairy Bill 2019 in the upper house this morning. @AmyRemeikis           @GuardianAus           #PoliticsLive           https://t.co/Zw4RXI9BE1           pic.twitter.com/q8Tj2VgNIZ
 - Mikearoo (@mpbowers) November 11, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.18am GMT
block-time published-time 2.05am GMT 
 Katharine Murphy has written on Michael McCormack's  Michael McCormacking this morning: 
Let me say this next bit very clearly. The best way to decline Michael's now rolling invitation to be tribal is to respond with reason, not with emotion.
With that basic objective in mind a couple of things can be noted.
Dear Michael. It is possible to do more than one thing at once.
Perhaps multitasking has never been a particularly strength of the deputy prime minister's, and that's fine, because juggling is certainly not for everyone, but I'll venture it is possible for emergency services to extinguish fires and for politicians and various experts to speak informatively about the underlying causes of fires so catastrophic that they have been designated a state of emergency in the middle of November, not in mid-to-late summer.
I reckon those things can happen simultaneously - both the analysing and the doing - without anything terrible happening or without anything fundamental being compromised.
I think we are that clever. Truly, I do.
You'll find the whole piece here :
 Related:  Dear Michael McCormack: the only 'raving lunatics' are those not worrying about climate change | Katharine Murphy
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.07am GMT
block-time published-time 1.58am GMT 
Noted raving inner-city greenie lunatic Margaret Thatcher : 
enltr30 years ago today, Margaret Thatcher became the world's first major leader to warn of the dangers of climate change and call for a legally-binding treaty to reduce CO2 emissions, which later became the Kyoto Protocol and COP. pic.twitter.com/ysNkPBwjqM
 - Oliver Cooper (@OliverCooper) November 8, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.01am GMT
block-time published-time 1.50am GMT 
enltrBack in the red bubble #canberrabubble           @mpbowers           @AmyRemeikis           @murpharoo           pic.twitter.com/yVDYTFL6mc
 - Lyndal Curtis (@lyndalcurtis) November 11, 2019
block-time published-time 1.30am GMT 
The bells have rung for the beginning of Senate-palooza, which means I am about to enter the little known ninth circle of hell - Senate QT supplementary questions. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.33am GMT
block-time published-time 1.29am GMT 
 Cory Bernardi has told Chris Kenny on Sky News he will be quitting the Senate some time in 2020. That is not a surprise - he has all but announced he is out of here, and said he wanted to leave when he was 50 (this year).
Plus, there was the whole political-party-didn't-quite-work-out thing. 
Elected as a Liberal for a six-year term in 2016, his seat will revert back to the Liberals when he officially pulls the pin. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.32am GMT
block-time published-time 1.23am GMT 
This is the big bill in the Senate today
enltrFirst bill on the #Senate 's agenda today is Senator            @PaulineHansonOz 's Protecting Australian Dairy Bill 2019            https://t.co/LemMg3tpLaLive broadcast will be available here            https://t.co/9Lgw5iXAcZ and you can keep track of proceedings with the Dynamic Red            https://t.co/Wi8bN9E81O
 - Australian Senate (@AuSenate) November 11, 2019
Neither medevac nor ensuring integrity is listed as yet (which means the government doesn't have the numbers).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.32am GMT
block-time published-time 1.16am GMT 
 Penny Wong was also asked about Jim Molan's return to the Senate this morning, while chatting to ABC radio: 
I sat on the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security with Jim Molan, and it might surprise people but we actually got on quite well. We obviously have different views but I always found him good to deal with. 
I hope that he could encourage perhaps the foreign minister to engage members of parliament and senators more on our relationship with China. I think he's certainly got a focus in that area and I certainly hope he will join me in encouraging foreign minister Payne to engage the parliament a little more.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.20am GMT
block-time published-time 1.14am GMT 
I know a few hours have gone by since that interview with Michael McCormack, but I am still flabbergasted.
What an absolute parsnip of a political mind.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.15am GMT
block-time published-time 1.02am GMT 
 Michael McCormack may have actually started a movement - energising people about politics. So he's proven useful in one way at least. 
enltrMy child's school IS closed tomorrow due to fire risk in Sydney metro region. I'll have to take time off work. Maybe once climate change starts to affect national productivity Michael McCormack and Scott Morrison will start to take it seriously
- Amber Robinson (@missrobinson) November 11, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.11am GMT
block-time published-time 12.52am GMT 
Mike Bowers has been out and about this morning:
    Kristina Keneally addresses Rural Australians for Refugees who conducted an all night vigil on the front lawns of Parliament House in Canberra this morning. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Rural Australians for Refugees on the front lawns of Parliament House. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Defence minister Linda Reynolds at the Remembrance Day service at the Australian war memorial. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Opposition leader Anthony Albanese at the Remembrance Day service. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Remembrance Day service at the Australian war memorial. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian      Remembrance Day. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian   
And of course, recognising the service and sacrifice of Indigenous Australians, who served during the Great War, but returned to the same prejudices they left.
    Remembrance Day service. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.14am GMT
block-time published-time 12.24am GMT 
Another group of raving inner city lunatics - because what else would former fire and emergency leaders warning about longer and more devastating fire seasons be, other than off their tree? Have they considered to sticking to their knitting? 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25am GMT
block-time published-time 12.21am GMT 
 Adam Bandt  responded to Michael McCormack this morning: 
Thoughts and prayers are not enough, we need science and action too," he said.
They've done everything in their power to make these catastrophic fires more likely.
When you cuddle coal in Canberra, the rest of the country burns.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.23am GMT
block-time published-time 11.47pm GMT 
The call to ceremony has just gone out across the Parliament House speakers, to commemorate the anniversary of the armistice of 11 November 1918.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.40pm GMT 
Remembrance Day ceremonies have officially begun.
 Scott Morrison is in Sydney, Anthony Albanese is at the War Memorial.
The governor general has just arrived to officially begin the proceedings in Canberra. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.42pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.29pm GMT 
ICYMI it late last Friday (and it was late last Friday, so you very well may have), a reminder that  Chris Kenny (yes, that one) will be advising Indigenous affairs minister Ken Wyatt on how best to move forward with an Indigenous voice to parliament (which is now being referred to as the Indigenous voice to government).
 Related:  Chris Kenny added to group working on Indigenous voice to parliament
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.24pm GMT 
Comments are on - thank you for your patience and welcome back btl.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.34pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.23pm GMT 
 'Warnings about more intense fires have been on the table for a long time,' Penny Wong says  
 Penny Wong  was climate change minister 12 years ago. Here she was speaking to the ABC this morning:
We need to stand with those who are battling fires and grieving and at risk. I understand why people are anxious about this. What I would say is when we get through this, it is a responsible thing for us to focus on, how we plan to keep Australians safe. You're right, I am a former climate minister, warnings about a longer bushfire season and more intense fires have been on the table for a long time.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.53am GMT
block-time published-time 11.21pm GMT 
Rural Australians for Refugees held an overnight vigil on the Parliament House lawns last night, protesting against the move to scrap medevac.
 Kristina Keneally addressed the group this morning, which included this exchange: 
 KK: I just want to be very clear about a couple things, especially while our friends from the media are here because I don't think I can say this often enough. When it comes to the medevac laws, minister Peter Dutton, the prime minister and others are simply not telling the truth. They continue to misrepresent, and frankly lie, about what this law does. If you listen to minister Dutton, you would believe that he is powerless when it comes to who he can let into the country.
 Attendee: Bullshit!
 KK: I won't use the word the gentleman just used because there's a camera and a microphone in front of me but let me say, loosely translated, he called time; he called that out in a more colourful bit of the language. It is not the case. It is not the case. Of course the minister still has that power. The minister has used that power himself to deny somebody entry into the country based on whether or not they are a security risk.
 Attendee: Or au pairs!
 KK:  The minister does like to let au pairs in as the lady says. However, the minister continues to repeat these lies that somehow medevac is letting people into the country that are a risk. Somehow he is powerless. Somehow doctors, any two doctors anywhere are just going to say anything or do anything and let people come in. Let us be clear about this - the minister has the power to stop anybody he wants based on security concerns. 
The doctors who allow people to come to this country because they need medical help are doctors appointed by minister Dutton and what we have seen under medevac is well over 100 people who have been able to get the medical care they needed because doctors appointed by minister Dutton have said these people are sick and they need to come to Australia to get health treatment. That's what is happening when it comes to medevac - people who are sick who need help are getting the help that they need. Now, I stand with you. The Australian Labor party stands with you. A huge sway of the crossbench in the Senate stands with you. And we will not stand by quietly; we will stand with you. We will stand up for people who are sick to get the healthcare they need. We will not stand by and watch this government just wave through a repeal of medevac. We will oppose the repeal of medevac. We will oppose it on the floor of the parliament and in every other forum that we can and I am so delighted to be here in this forum, this morning, with all of you who are bearing witness. Thank you for what you're doing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.04pm GMT 
(We are still working on a moderator. Hold tight - in the mean time, you can always catch me on Twitter.)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.53pm GMT 
And  Michael McCormack  ahead of the May election on how we need to be more respectful of each other in political debate:
 I think everybody should actually be a little bit more respectful of each other, and I think we were talking yesterday about Van Badham, and the language that she uses and yet, Tanya Plibersek and Bill Shorten are happy to be situated beside her and pose for photos. I think her language is far worse than calling some of the metropolitan people latte-sippers. They're drinking milk, comes from a country cow, they're having coffee beans which no doubt comes from a regional centre. The fact is we need to be more respectful in our dialogue. One thing I will say about Kevin Rudd is that when he retired he talked about the politeness that is in politics and the need for more of it. And he was probably right, he was right. And he's probably still to this day correct.  But the fact is, Twitter, there's a lot of people, and particularly the left side of politics, which use Twitter as a weapon against people, who stand more and represent regional Australians. The Great Dividing Range is not just a geographical barrier, sadly these days it's also a metaphor for the differences between metropolitan cities and the great sprawl that is regional Australia. Warren Truss said to me one day that back in his day, when he was a young fella, a lot of people would come and visit the country farmer, country cousins. That doesn't happen these days, we're so busy! We're so caught up in the hustle and bustle of life that city people forget where their food and fibre comes from.  And that's why I was delighted to stand beside Scott Morrison, last week and announced a new arrangement by which country kids and city kids are going to be drawn closer together because metropolitan kids are going to know where their food comes from. It just doesn't come from a fridge, it just doesn't come from a supermarket, it actually comes from a farm. And we will always stand up for farmers, we will always make sure that their hard work and their endeavours are respected, and we'll get on with doing that. Maybe I shouldn't tweet about latte-sippers in the next few weeks, hey?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.51pm GMT 
 Michael McCormack' s first speech included this line:
 Politics is not about power; it is about people representing those people and speaking up for them loudly, often and passionately. I have lived my life by this motto: I promise not to be silent when I ought to speak. That is my commitment to the people of the Riverina and to this parliament. 
How quickly we forget. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.49pm GMT 
Welcome back to the Senate, Jim Molan 
enltrI have just received a letter of resignation from Arthur Sinodinos @A_Sinodinos as a senator for NSW. The resignation takes effect immediately. 1/4
- Senator Scott Ryan (@SenatorRyan) November 10, 2019
block-time published-time 10.37pm GMT 
AAP is reporting that Labor is continuing the fight against the government's unions bill.
Labor is ratcheting up its lobbying of the Senate crossbench to block the Morrison government's proposed union-busting laws. 
Legislation making it easier to deregister unions and ban officials is due to be debated in the Senate this week.
The government is expected to tweak the bill after negotiations with minor party Centre Alliance, which should be enough to get the laws over the line.
"This is a bill which is about destroying the right of trade unions to organise," Labor senator Penny Wong told ABC radio on Monday.
"It is about undermining the capacity of trade unions and their members to advocate for better wages and conditions and better safety."
The legislation makes it easier to deregister unions for improper conduct and repeated breaches of the law and allows for the automatic disqualification of union officials charged with serious crimes.
It also places public interest tests on union mergers.
Australian Council of Trade Unions secretary Sally McManus made a direct appeal to the crossbench senators.
"Unions will be threatened with being shut down for late paperwork. This is a sledgehammer, don't let it happen," McManus said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.19pm GMT 
enltrNSW has just declared 'a state of emergency' for the next 7 days. @abcnews
 - Sabra Lane (@SabraLane) November 10, 2019
block-time published-time 10.16pm GMT 
Our leaders just covering themselves in glory and leadership, this morning:
enltrCredit to @mjrowland68 for pushing. Ask 3 times. Ask 4. Saddens me            @GladysB says "let's not get into politics"... as her first response. This isn't politics. Science doesn't play politics. That drought? Extreme weather patterns? Unique events? Exactly what scientists predicted            https://t.co/TcUpk3S1eY
 - Mike Cannon-Brookes ????????? (@mcannonbrookes) November 10, 2019
block-time published-time 10.12pm GMT 
Also a reminder, because it didn't get a hell of a lot of attention late last week, released as it was at the same time as the latest drought response, but the government-appointed drought coordinator general, Major Gen  Stephen Day, was also pretty emphatic about climate change's impact on our environment. 
 Related:  Drought to become more frequent and severe due to climate change - government report
Hopefully, Michael McCormack has the opportunity to call him a "raving inner-city lunatic" to his face. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.09pm GMT 
enltrOr like Wagga Council, which declared a climate emergency... https://t.co/HZ86wHHIhe
 - Gabrielle Chan (@gabriellechan) November 10, 2019
block-time published-time 10.08pm GMT 
Also a reminder that it is a politician's job to look at overarching policy to help those on the ground. #thoughtsandprayers don't stop catastrophic fires. 
enltr. @M_McCormackMP I live in a fire prone area in reg Vic. When I leave my family to do my job, they face the risk of fighting a catastrophic fire alone. Rather than trying to divide Australians, why not do something about the            #ClimateEmergency thats accelerating these deadly fires?
- Richard Di Natale (@RichardDiNatale) November 10, 2019
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.02pm GMT 
Given Michael McCormack's  line of thinking, backed up by David Littleproud, from now on, no one is allowed to mention speeding or other driver-caused factors in road crashes, drug use in overdoses, or alcohol in "fuelled" violence. 
Discussing contributing factors is cancelled. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.57pm GMT 
Also: don't worry, I haven't forgotten you in the comments. We just have to wait until there is a moderator available to turn them on - there is a bit going on in the world at the moment, but we will have you below the line very soon. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.56pm GMT 
Another "raving inner city lunatic", obviously:
enltrIn Sept, former Chief of Fire & Rescue NSW, Greg Mullins told #thedrum of vain attempts to meet with PM & ministers on            #bushfires. His letters ignored. His pleas that we act now on climate, his concern we're unprepared for this "uncharted territory" of extreme weather - ignored.            https://t.co/kEJklA2cQH
 - Dr Julia Baird (@bairdjulia) November 10, 2019
block-time published-time 9.45pm GMT 
 LNP MP and  minister for water resources, drought, rural finance, natural disaster and emergency management David Littleproud  was also on ABC TV this morning and was asked about Michael McCormack's comments by host Michael Rowland. 
 Michael Rowland : Your boss, Michael McCormack, says it galls him when people blame climate change on these bushfires and he says "it is raving inner-city lunatics". What do you make of that language? 
 David Littleproud: Look, I think the frustrating thing is there are a number of people out there that have been impacted by this fire that are very fragile and those that are traumatised and those that have a lot of anxiety at the moment worrying over the next couple of days worrying about what might happen. This is not the time by these people that want to weaponise climate change... 
 MR: Minister, excuse the interruption. We're not talking about politicians. We're talking about residents here, with no political axe to grind, saying climate change is a concern, something's new, something's changed, these fires are unprecedented. They're not talking politics. 
 DL : Well, and when we do talk about that we can say that we are leading the world but we need the world to lead with us. We need other international communities to come with us. We expect that. We put our hand up as a federal government and said we'll do our bit of the heavy lifting with respect to emissions reductions. We'll do that because that's what scientists tell us is the best way to address it but we need other nations to lead with us. Australia can't do it all by ourselves and it is unrealistic to think we can do it by ourselves. That's why we need to be the global leader that we are and expect other nations to come with us. 
 MR:  Are people concerned with climate change, again, "raving inner-city lunatics"? 
 DL: Obviously these types of events bring emotions out and everybody needs to be focus just on the here and now at the moment and those conversations will continue but we have a strong... 
 MR: Was Michael McCormack wrong to say that? Was Michael McCormack being too emotional? 
 DL: No, I mean, Michael McCormack has been out talking to the people that have been impacted. He's trying to get results for those people, those people that have had their homes lost, those people that are concerned today and tomorrow that will lose their homes, he's concerned about making sure that our focus, our primary focus, from state, federal government and local state, federal government and local government is all about them. That's the responsible thing to do. Let's have those conversations in the cold, hard light of day after the event. But our focus and energy should be on the men and women fighting these fires and also the men and women, and children who are at risk. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.40pm GMT 
I am not sure if Carol Sparks  qualifies as one of the "raving inner-city lunatics" or "inner-city lefties" raising concerns about climate change in Michael McCormack land, but who knows. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.37pm GMT 
 Glen Innes mayor Carol Sparks: 'To deny climate change is, to me, very ill-informed.'  
 Carol Sparks, the mayor of Glen Innes Severn council, which had an absolute horror weekend dealing with the fires, spoke to ABC TV this morning about Michael McCormack's interview, where he said he found it "galling" to have climate change raised as the cause of worsening fires: 
Well, I probably couldn't respond how I really feel on television but I think that Michael McCormack needs to read the science, and that is what I am going by, is the science. 
It is not a political thing. It is a scientific fact that we are going through climate change. 
Of course it's not relevant at the moment when people's houses are burning and you've lost lives, and you've lost friends, and you've lost family. 
You don't think, "Oh, this is climate change." You think, "What am I going to do next and how will I save myself?" 
But the overall thing is we are so dry in this country - we haven't had rain for years in some places. All the dams and creeks and rivers are dry, and we need to look at what we're going to do about that in the future. To deny climate change is, to me, a very ill-informed and uneducated way of looking at things.  
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.56am GMT
block-time published-time 9.29pm GMT 
Meanwhile, the latest Newspoll is out, and with all the usual caveats about polling, it shows the Coalition and Labor on 50/50 for the first time since the election, in terms of two-party-preferred.
The Australian put that down to the drought and the softening economy.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.34pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.26pm GMT 
On the leaders front, Scott Morrison will attend a Remembrance Day ceremony in Sydney, while I believe Anthony Albanese  will attend the War Memorial service with Linda Reynolds. 
block-time published-time 9.24pm GMT 
Three people have been confirmed as dead, another five are unaccounted for and 40 people have been injured in the latest fire emergency which has also taken scores of homes and property. 
The NSW Rural Fire Service has also placed the greater Sydney region under a "catastrophic" fire risk for the first time since the ratings system began about a decade ago. 
You can hear Michael McCormack talk about the very "concerning" early start to the bushfire season, without mentioning any of the reasons why, here. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.18pm GMT 
 Good morning  
We start the Senate-only sitting week in the midst of an argument over whether or not Australia can manage to have a climate change discussion in the midst of an event made worse by climate change.
Despite fire-fighting bosses, scientists and even the drought coordinator-general saying that climate change is going to make events which have always occurred in this nation - bushfires, drought, etc - worse, (which we can all see ), no one is allowed to mention the giant burning elephant in the room.
The deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, summed up this argument on ABC RN radio this morning:
"We've had fires in Australia since time began, and what people need now is sympathy, understanding, help and shelter," he said.
"They don't need the ravings of some pure, enlightened and woke capital-city greenies at this time."
#thoughtsandprayers 
We'll have the continued "discussion" around that, as well as what happens in the Senate. The big bills - medevac among them - are not on the list as yet, so you all know what that means.
The Senate won't sit until 12.30pm because of Rememberance Day, so we have some time to get into the nitty gritty of what has happened over the last couple of weeks. For that, you have Mike Bowers, Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin and Paul Karp at your disposal. Plus, a slightly fluey, but still standing me. 
Ready?
Let's get into it. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.59pm GMT

Load-Date: November 11, 2019


End of Document




The media is failing on climate change - here's how they can do better ahead of 2020; We spoke to climate change experts for advice on how news outlets can cover the environment in ways that make voters listen
The Guardian(London)
April 30, 2019 Tuesday 2:40 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:3
Length: 1248 words
Byline: Emily Holden
Body


America elected Donald Trump at the end of the hottest year ever recorded, without debate moderators asking him a single question about global warming. But after three years of record temperatures, devastating wildfires and some of the most destructive hurricanes in US history, the media is facing new pressure - often from the candidates themselves - to give the subject more prominence during the 2020 election.
Yesterday, MSNBC devoted more than five minutes to Beto O'Rourke's rollout of a $5tn climate plan, calling climate a "kitchen table issue" for 2020. Jay Inslee, the Washington governor who is seeking to make climate change the central thrust of his campaign, is calling on the Democratic National Committee to host a debate solely focused on climate. Bernie Sanders raised the issue during his town hall on Fox News earlier this month - and even            drew cheers from the audience when he talked about new jobs in the renewable energy sector. Rising temperatures and the crisis they pose for humans were part of every Democratic candidate's pitch during CNN's marathon of hour-long            town halls last week.
In the run-up to 2020, as newsroom leaders grapple with their mistakes in the 2016 election - from reliance on inaccurate polls to underestimating the impact of fake news - the failure to press candidates on climate change is emerging as an area of self-examination. 
"In 2016 there were almost no questions asked , which is insane," says Tony Bartelme, a senior reporter who covers climate change for the Post and Courier in Charleston, South Carolina. "It's a good start that we're starting to hear questions for 2020."
The Guardian is joining forces with Columbia Journalism Review and            the Nation to launch            Covering Climate Change: A New Playbook for a 1.5-Degree World, a project aimed at dramatically improving US media coverage of the climate crisis. The project kicks off today with            an event at Columbia Journalism School featuring CJR's editor-in-chief, Kyle Pope, the Nation's environment correspondent, Mark Hertsgaard, and the Guardian climate columnist Bill McKibben.
The Green New Deal - progressives' vision for slowing climate change without further burdening the poor - has also helped catapult the subject into the 2020 conversation. In March, MSNBC's Chris Hayes took the highly unusual step of devoting an hour to the idea, in a show featuring the New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.
But even as there are signs that airtime for climate is beginning to increase, questions remain about the depth and quality of the coverage. "I don't see the media paying much attention to differentiating how serious each candidate is on the climate question," said David Gelber, the creator and executive producer for the Showtime series on climate change, Years Of Living Dangerously.
More Americans than ever are worried about climate change. A poll of likely Democratic caucus-goers in Iowa ranked climate change about on par with healthcare as the            top issues they want candidates to talk about.
Research indicates that major national newspapers are beginning to pay more attention to climate - but local publications and TV news haven't kept up. The major broadcast networks - ABC, CBS, NBC and FOX - spent just 142 minutes on climate change last year, according to one calculation from the progressive group Media Matters. And about half of Americans hear about global warming in the media            once a month or less, according to surveys by climate communications programs at Yale and George Mason universities.
Meanwhile, five major national US newspapers - the Washington Post, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, USA Today and the Los Angeles Times - have, in aggregate, roughly tripled their coverage of climate change since four years ago, according to the Media and Climate Change Observatory at the University of Colorado in Boulder.
The New York Times now  has a desk of about a dozen covering climate .  Climate editor Hannah Fairfield said the team is collaborating with the politics desk to report on the 2020 candidates' climate positions.
But climate coverage is not just a question of volume- it's also a question of approach. We spoke to experts in the field for their advice on how news outlets should cover climate in ways that make voters listen during the 2020 race.
                   Quote conservatives                   
Adam Berinsky, who studies why some people believe political rumors - such as that climate change is a hoax - said people who buy into political rumors are driven by a "combination of conspiratorial dispositions and political motivations". They are more likely to change their minds if they hear from sources they identify with, often fellow conservatives. 
Aaron McCright, a sociology professor who studies public opinion at Michigan State University, said journalists should give the small but growing numbers of conservatives who care about climate change "more of a mouthpiece so that their message could start competing" with science denialism.
Republicans who want to limit climate pollution for the sake of national security or as part of a plan for energy independence need to compete better with climate deniers, said McCright. "Those could be effective messages if they're promoted hour by hour, day by day, week by week, by dozens or hundreds of conservatives in everyday life, TV, papers, Congress."
                   Bring up climate, even when the candidates don't                   
Gelber says reporters should bring the campaign story back to climate change, even if the candidates aren't discussing their proposed solutions. He said they should help audiences differentiate between the candidates, explaining to viewers and readers how specific they have gotten in their plans.
                   Cover climate as a local news story                   
Edward Maibach, a George Mason climate communications scientist, said "most people are saying they rarely hear climate change news because most people pay attention to local news. Most climate news in America is not local news". Maibach's program, Climate Matters, trains weathercasters and local reporters to explain the local consequences of a warming world.
Bartelme suggests trying to connect local catastrophes to the climate story and explain why the extreme weather is happening.
"What we can do is make those connections for people," Fairfield said. Reporters can seek out "local stories that have climate fingerprints on them".
                   Focus on solutions                   
Elizabeth Arnold, a longtime reporter and professor at the University of Alaska, argues that "doom and gloom" coverage alone may force the public to disengage.
"Repetition of a narrow narrative that focuses exclusively on the impacts of climate change leaves the public with an overall sense of powerlessness," she said in an introduction to one paper.
                   Choose words carefully                   
Susan Hassol, director of the organization Climate Communication, said the phrase "heat-trapping pollution" is easier to understand than "greenhouse gas", and "global warming"            conveys more meaning than "climate change           ".
                     The Guardian is partnering with Columbia Journalism Review and                                                       the Nation today on "            Covering Climate Change," a town hall event with media leaders about how to change the media narrative on climate change. Watch the event live            here between 9am and 2pm.                   

Load-Date: April 30, 2019


End of Document




As climate change heats up, Arctic residents struggle to keep their homes; Climate change has brought a myriad of issues to the far north, but rising sea levels are now threatening existing home owners and contributing to housing shortages
The Guardian
March 17, 2016 Thursday 9:42 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1642 words
Byline: Heather Hansman
Body


In the spring, after the permafrost thaws and the ground settles, Wilson Andrew Sr takes a wrench to the metal pilings that hold up the foundation of his house in Atmautluak, Alaska, and makes it level again. He cranks the screws until the foundation flattens out, level with the ground. At least for now. 
Andrew's house, on a small island traditionally inhabited by indigenous Alaskans, is a prototype modular home designed by the Fairbanks-based nonprofit Cold Climate Housing Research Center (CCHRC) to be resistant to harsh weather and a quickly changing climate, while still being affordable and easy to build.
 Related:  The Antarctic ice sheet is a sleeping giant, beginning to stir | John Abraham
These are the challenges of housing design in the far north, where seasonal variability is exacerbated by climate change - like the heave and twitch of permafrost and the slow creep landward of the edge of the sea ice - adds to the challenge of building in an already brutal environment. Pipes freeze, walls molder. It can be prohibitively expensive, if not impossible, to get labor and supplies, which has led to a huge shortage of housing. And then there's the social challenge associated with providing permanent housing for population groups that have been living nomadic subsistence lifestyles for generations. 
This winter, both January and February brought record low coverage of arctic sea ice. And, as the ice surface contracts, so does the oil money that funds many northern communities. Populations are increasing in places like Iqaluit, Canada, and towns like Newtok, Alaska need to be moved to avoid falling into the sea as the ice recedes. So city planners, architects, and tribal groups, in Arctic and sub-Arctic regions, from Newtok to Nunuvut, are trying to answer the question of how to live in the changing north, and how to do it now. It's a technical, cultural, financial and environmental puzzle. And as the Arctic warms faster than predicted, it's becoming increasingly urgent.
There are 40 different indigenous groups that live within the Arctic Circle, from the Inuit to the Saami in Finland and Norway. For millenia, most of these groups were semi-nomadic, moving to hunt or fish, tracking the edge of the sea ice. It's only in the last half a decade that more permanent structures have become part of the Arctic infrastructure, and they haven't settled particularly well. Part of learning to design for a changing Arctic is amending what's already been done.
Molly Rettig, communications coordinator at CCHRC, explains that the federal government made a big effort to develop the Alaskan tundra in the 70s and 80s. Awarding contracts to the lowest bidder, the government's housing push resulted in "cookie cutter pre-fab houses that look like they should be in Texas or North Carolina", she says. "That means they're not designed for permafrost. The houses have no eaves, and there's no building envelope, so they're falling apart and rotting, battered by storms and snow and wind. Plus, these are subsistence people, and there's no space built in for skins or for working on snow machines." She says it's typical of government funding in these parts: "These agencies parachute in and say, 'We're going to give you plumbing', and then the pipes freeze. They're not engaged with it at all."
To design for the culture and climate, and to build in sustainable ways, CCHRC tries to meld building practices that have worked in the Arctic for centuries with technology and technique that can make structures affordable and easy to build in remote villages. "We try to flip it around and ask what their traditional housing was like," Rettig says. "Fifty years ago they were in sod huts or skin tents, and you'll still see the ruins of sod igloos around, so we try to use the pieces of that design and architecture that worked and that you could mimic." 
They've designed houses with super-insulated walls to imitate traditional sod, and built composting, waterless toilets that dry out waste so it can be burned for heat - crucial in places where sewers don't make sense and sky-high fuel costs account for much of household spending. This spring, in Newtok, the nonprofit is working on a prototype house built on skis, so it can be towed across the tundra as the ocean encroaches. 
But environmentally appropriate design is only part of the process. In environmentally risky locations it can be hard to get funding and impossible to get insurance. Just getting building materials to towns on the tundra can account for a significant portion of the building cost. 
"The building season is short, especially for communities off the road system, which is 80% of communities in Alaska," Rettig says. "We have to barge materials in, so by July you have to be ready. If you forget something you're waiting another year." 
To get around this, CCHRC designs houses as easy-to-assemble kits that a crew of six relatively untrained carpenters can build it in eight weeks.
In Atmautluak, population 277, CCHRC required Andrew to participate in the construction of his new house, in hopes that the process would also educate the community in how to construct more sustainable structures. 
There is both a lack of housing and a lack of jobs in far northern aboriginal communities, which leads to overcrowding and hidden homelessness. Traditional practices, like hunting, have been physically squeezed out, setting off a cultural disconnect and a lack of food and supplies. "They've been in that area for thousands of years, but they've never had that permanent infrastructure. We came in, changed culture and changed land, and now it's falling apart," Rettig says. 
A group of architects at the Toronto-based firm Lateral is approaching design in the far north from the perspective of sustaining and preserving culture. "For years we imported southern models of planning, food, education, just about everything," says Lola Sheppard, a partner at Lateral. "That's has failed dramatically in almost every sense, technologically and culturally, so we need to reimagine how we design in the north." 
Lateral has been working on a project called Arctic Adaptations, which tries to find design-based solutions to issues like overcrowding and the degredation of traditional hunting grounds. She says there have been huge failures in designing for northern climates because architects and planners haven't taken culture into account. "We're looking at how people move, how people hunt, how healthcare is provided, as well as the size of families and how they share food," Sheppard says. "We want to look at how architecture can be a tool for cultural empowerment." 
They've designed a network of food storage hubs, and they're working on ways to make buildings multifunctional, like a caribou research station that also serves as a shelter for hunters.
The research is important for future design, but there's also a need for immediate solutions. In Iqaluit, Nunavut, the capitol of Canada's newest province, Mélodie Simard, the director of planning and development, is struggling to find land to build housing for the city's burgeoning population. Located on the south coast of Baffin Island, Iqaluit is only 17 years old, but the government center now offers public services and a chance for employment. 
Iqaluit was first established as an Army Base and now faces growing pains as aboriginal people from smaller more remote communities in Nunavut and residents from the south arrive for jobs in the growing economy. According to the Standards Council of Canada, in the Northwest Territories alone, estimates suggest it could cost as much as $230m to adapt existing buildings, or more than $5,000 for each of the 7,000 residents.
 Related:  I'm a cook at one of Antarctica's research stations. Any questions for me? | Jessica Barder
Simard says they want to build a new, 500-unit housing development, and that they're working within newly adapted infrastructure standards that were put in place to address climate change, but that she's struggling to find both land and capital. "Right now my focus is trying to address the housing crisis. Our rental price is very, very, very steep," she says. "We're trying to make more land available as soon as possible within our constraints."
Iqaluit has developed a sustainability plan to reflect the Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit, or the Inuit way of life, and the new housing development is built accordingly. To soak up maximum light and heat from the sun, all the houses face the south, regardless of their orientation to the street. Thermosyphons, low-tech heat pumps have been installed into the foundations of larger buildings, to draw heat out of the land to keep the permafrost cold and less likely to move.
Across northern latitudes, environmental changes are increasingly forcing communities to adapt more quickly than expected. In Kiruna, the northernmost town in Sweden, the land under the town has started to collapse due to mining. The town is slowly being rebuilt three kilometers away, and planners and architects are being more conscious of the community's environment and the cultural context. The contractors are building around traditional reindeer herding grounds, instead of through them, and the new structures are ultra insulated and designed to harvest heat and shed wind. It hasn't been cheap, but they've managed to find a way to adapt. 
Rettig says there are some solutions coming out of Alaska, too. In the coastal city of Bethel, where they predict needing 2,000 homes in the next 10 years, the community has started a small-scale logging industry, reducing housing costs, and built a truss plant, creating both jobs and houses. 
"Everyone keeps saying the next few years are going to be really telling," Rettig says. "We are at a major pivot point: is this culture is going to keep going or disappear?"

Load-Date: March 17, 2016


End of Document




As climate change heats up, Arctic residents struggle to keep their homes; Climate change has brought a myriad of issues to the far north, but rising sea levels are now threatening existing home owners and contributing to housing shortages
The Guardian
March 17, 2016 Thursday 12:27 PM GMT


Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 1636 words
Byline: Heather Hansman
Body


In the spring, after the permafrost thaws and the ground settles, Wilson Andrew Sr takes a wrench to the metal pilings that hold up the foundation of his house in Atmautluak, Alaska, and makes it level again. He cranks the screws until the foundation flattens out, level with the ground. At least for now. 
Andrew's house, on a small island traditionally inhabited by indigenous Alaskans, is a prototype modular home designed by the Fairbanks-based nonprofit Cold Climate Housing Research Center (CCHRC) to be resistant to harsh weather and a quickly changing climate, while still being affordable and easy to build.
 Related:  The Antarctic ice sheet is a sleeping giant, beginning to stir | John Abraham
These are the challenges of housing design in the far north, where seasonal variability is exacerbated by climate change - like the heave and twitch of permafrost and the slow creep landward of the edge of the sea ice - adds to the challenge of building in an already brutal environment. Pipes freeze, walls molder. It can be prohibitively expensive, if not impossible, to get labor and supplies, which has led to a huge shortage of housing. And then there's the social challenge associated with providing permanent housing for population groups that have been living nomadic subsistence lifestyles for generations. 
This winter, both January and February brought record low coverage of arctic sea ice. And, as the ice surface contracts, so does the oil money that funds many northern communities. Populations are increasing in places like Iqaluit, Canada, and towns like Newtok, Alaska need to be moved to avoid falling into the sea as the ice recedes. So city planners, architects, and tribal groups, in Arctic and sub-Arctic regions, from Newtok to Nunuvut, are trying to answer the question of how to live in the changing north, and how to do it now. It's a technical, cultural, financial and environmental puzzle. And as the Arctic warms faster than predicted, it's becoming increasingly urgent.
There are 40 different indigenous groups that live within the Arctic Circle, from the Inuit to the Saami in Finland and Norway. For millenia, most of these groups were semi-nomadic, moving to hunt or fish, tracking the edge of the sea ice. It's only in the last half a decade that more permanent structures have become part of the Arctic infrastructure, and they haven't settled particularly well. Part of learning to design for a changing Arctic is amending what's already been done.
Molly Rettig, communications coordinator at CCHRC, explains that the federal government made a big effort to develop the Alaskan tundra in the 70s and 80s. Awarding contracts to the lowest bidder, the government's housing push resulted in "cookie cutter pre-fab houses that look like they should be in Texas or North Carolina", she says. "That means they're not designed for permafrost. The houses have no eaves, and there's no building envelope, so they're falling apart and rotting, battered by storms and snow and wind. Plus, these are subsistence people, and there's no space built in for skins or for working on snow machines." She says it's typical of government funding in these parts: "These agencies parachute in and say, 'We're going to give you plumbing', and then the pipes freeze. They're not engaged with it at all."
To design for the culture and climate, and to build in sustainable ways, CCHRC tries to meld building practices that have worked in the Arctic for centuries with technology and technique that can make structures affordable and easy to build in remote villages. "We try to flip it around and ask what their traditional housing was like," Rettig says. "Fifty years ago they were in sod huts or skin tents, and you'll still see the ruins of sod igloos around, so we try to use the pieces of that design and architecture that worked and that you could mimic." 
They've designed houses with super-insulated walls to imitate traditional sod, and built composting, waterless toilets that dry out waste so it can be burned for heat - crucial in places where sewers don't make sense and sky-high fuel costs account for much of household spending. This spring, in Newtok, the nonprofit is working on a prototype house built on skis, so it can be towed across the tundra as the ocean encroaches. 
But environmentally appropriate design is only part of the process. In environmentally risky locations it can be hard to get funding and impossible to get insurance. Just getting building materials to towns on the tundra can account for a significant portion of the building cost. 
"The building season is short, especially for communities off the road system, which is 80% of communities in Alaska," Rettig says. "We have to barge materials in, so by July you have to be ready. If you forget something you're waiting another year." 
To get around this, CCHRC designs houses as easy-to-assemble kits that a crew of six relatively untrained carpenters can build it in eight weeks.
In Atmautluak, population 277, CCHRC required Andrew to participate in the construction of his new house, in hopes that the process would also educate the community in how to construct more sustainable structures. 
There is both a lack of housing and a lack of jobs in far northern aboriginal communities, which leads to overcrowding and hidden homelessness. Traditional practices, like hunting, have been physically squeezed out, setting off a cultural disconnect and a lack of food and supplies. "They've been in that area for thousands of years, but they've never had that permanent infrastructure. We came in, changed culture and changed land, and now it's falling apart," Rettig says. 
A group of architects at the Toronto-based firm Lateral is approaching design in the far north from the perspective of sustaining and preserving culture. "For years we imported southern models of planning, food, education, just about everything," says Lola Sheppard, a partner at Lateral. "That's has failed dramatically in almost every sense, technologically and culturally, so we need to reimagine how we design in the north." 
Lateral has been working on a project called Arctic Adaptations, which tries to find design-based solutions to issues like overcrowding and the degredation of traditional hunting grounds. She says there have been huge failures in designing for northern climates because architects and planners haven't taken culture into account. "We're looking at how people move, how people hunt, how healthcare is provided, as well as the size of families and how they share food," Sheppard says. "We want to look at how architecture can be a tool for cultural empowerment." 
They've designed a network of food storage hubs, and they're working on ways to make buildings multifunctional, like a caribou research station that also serves as a shelter for hunters.
The research is important for future design, but there's also a need for immediate solutions. In Iqaluit, Nunavut, the capitol of Canada's newest province, Mélodie Simard, the director of planning and development, is struggling to find land to build housing for the city's burgeoning population. Located on the south coast of Baffin Island, Nunuvut is only 17 years old, but the government center now offers public services and a chance for employment. 
Historically a fishing camp, Iqaluit is facing growing pains as aboriginal people, both from smaller more remote communities in Nunuvut and from the south, arrive for jobs in the growing economy. According to the Standards Council of Canada, in the Northwest Territories alone, estimates suggest it could cost as much as $230m to adapt existing buildings, or more than $5,000 for each of the 7,000 residents.
 Related:  I'm a cook at one of Antarctica's research stations. Any questions for me? | Jessica Barder
Simard says they want to build a new, 500-unit housing development, and that they're working within newly adapted infrastructure standards that were put in place to address climate change, but that she's struggling to find both land and capital. "Right now my focus is trying to address the housing crisis. Our rental price is very, very, very steep," she says. "We're trying to make more land available as soon as possible within our constraints."
Iqaluit has developed a sustainability plan to reflect the Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit, or the Inuit way of life, and the new housing development is built accordingly. To soak up maximum light and heat from the sun, all the houses face the south, regardless of their orientation to the street. Thermosyphons, low-tech heat pumps have been installed into the foundations, to draw heat out of the land to keep the permafrost cold and less likely to move.
Across northern latitudes, environmental changes are increasingly forcing communities to adapt more quickly than expected. In Kiruna, the northernmost town in Sweden, the land under the town has started to collapse due to mining. The town is slowly being rebuilt three kilometers away, and planners and architects are being more conscious of the community's environment and the cultural context. The contractors are building around traditional reindeer herding grounds, instead of through them, and the new structures are ultra insulated and designed to harvest heat and shed wind. It hasn't been cheap, but they've managed to find a way to adapt. 
Rettig says there are some solutions coming out of Alaska, too. In the coastal city of Bethel, where they predict needing 2,000 homes in the next 10 years, the community has started a small-scale logging industry, reducing housing costs, and built a truss plant, creating both jobs and houses. 
"Everyone keeps saying the next few years are going to be really telling," Rettig says. "We are at a major pivot point: is this culture is going to keep going or disappear?"

Load-Date: March 17, 2016


End of Document




Climate change is this election's top issue. Guardian Australia tells you what you need to know; Guardian Australia gives climate change reporting the prominence it deserves, stories which often go unreported by others in the mainstream mediaSupport our independent journalism with a single or recurring contribution
The Guardian(London)
May 14, 2019 Tuesday 8:20 AM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:3
Length: 1362 words
Byline: Guardian staff
Body


The number one issue for Australians during this 2019 election campaign is climate change. Polling by foreign policy thinktank Lowy found the majority of Australians believe global warming is a critical threat. From a list of 12 threats to Australia's national interests, more than 60% of adults rank climate change as number one. This is up 18 points since their survey in 2014.
Reporting on climate change is a priority for the Guardian globally. We give these stories the prominence they deserve, stories which often go unreported by others in the mainstream media. At this critical time for our planet, we are determined to inform readers about threats, consequences and solutions based on scientific facts, not political prejudice or business interests.
During this election campaign, we have covered the climate emergency from every angle. From the shocking UN report on the accelerating decline of the Earth's natural life-support systems released last week and what Australia needs to do about it, through to the short-sightedness of some of the political debate and also why there is still hope for our species, Guardian Australia has reported on it. There is simply no bigger issue.
                                        Selected reading on the Guardian's coverage of climate change                                      
    • The Guardian view on the Australian election: vote on the climate emergency The Coalition appears deaf to the rising clamour from the electorate for action on climate change: we cannot afford to waste any more time on inaction.
    • The climate change election: where do the parties stand on the environment? Adam Morton reported on the parties' key policies, including emissions, renewable energy, endangered species, waste and recycling and the Great Barrier Reef.
    • Human society under urgent threat from loss of Earth's natural life Jonathan Watts reported on the damning UN report by the world's leading scientists that revealed human society is in jeopardy from the accelerating decline of the Earth's natural life-support systems.
    • UN environment warning: 10 key points and what Australia must do Calla Wahlquist looked at Australia's role in the extinction crisis and what we must learn from the report about native species, Indigenous land management, water efficiency and more.
    • Climate change takes centre stage in Australia's election Kate Lyons reported on the very different messages from the two prime ministerial candidates on how to address environmental emergency.
    • Tony Abbott bet me $100 the climate will not change in 10 years Cassie Flanagan Willanski revealed the former Australian prime minister is so confident climate change is nothing to worry about he put money on it.
    • The obsessive focus on imaginary costs of climate action is harming our prosperity Erwin Jackson wrote on the short-sightedness of the current election campaign discussions on climate change and how the focus on mythical costs of action risks will harm our prosperity and squandered economic opportunity.
    • Modelling that shows Labor's climate policy could cost billions is ridiculous Frank Jotzo examined the modelling that caused such consternation and reminded warring parties that we should be focusing on positioning Australia for a low-carbon future.
    • I'm willing to go to jail to stop Adani and save our beloved country. Will you stand with me? In this anti-Adani rally speech, Richard Flanagan said the fight against Adani's Carmichael coalmine defines the fight against the climate crisis.
    • Climate change costings that don't count the cost of inaction are worthless Greg Jericho said we must demand better of our political parties and our media on this issue.
    • Britain passes one week without coal power for first time since 1882 Jasper Jolly reported on the landmark event that followed the UK's government pledge to phase out coal-fired electricity by 2025.
    • It's time for nations to unite around an International Green New Deal Yanis Varoufakis and David Adler wrote about the need for a global response to climate change, given several countries have proposed their own versions of a Green New Deal.
    • After Extinction Rebellion, Australian politicians are on notice - change is coming Nicky Ison implored major parties to learn from the UK's Extinction Rebellion protests and other global movements to fight climate change.
    • The media is failing on climate change - here's how they can do better ahead of 2020 Guardian reporters asked climate change experts for advice on how news outlets can cover the environment in ways that make voters listen.
    • Climate change poses a clear financial risk to Australia Chris Barrett and Anna Skarbek discussed how Australia stands to benefit from a successful - and rapid - low-carbon transition, given our world-class solar and wind energy resource base.
    • Dare to declare capitalism dead - before it takes us all down with it George Monbiot wrote about the incompatibility of the economic system with the survival of life on Earth, and called for something new.
    • The Extinction Rebellion scorecard: what did it achieve? After mass civil disobedience in the UK, Guardian reporters looked at what impact the protests had made and whether anything had changed.
    • Fact or fiction? We check Coalition's claims about Labor's climate change policy Adam Morton fact-checked the government's claims that the opposition's emissions reduction policy would cost $26bn.
    • Melting permafrost in Arctic will have $70tn climate impact - study Jonathan Watts looked at a study that shows how destabilised natural systems will worsen a man-made problem.
    • To stop global catastrophe, we must believe in humans again Bill McKibben said it was time for mass resistance to demand action on climate because the technology to prevent the crisis already exists.
    • Politicians' reluctance on climate change is bizarre - action would not only be right but popular Jeff Sparrow wrote how strange it was that there were political inaction given many ordinary people are calling for radical climate policies
    • Humanity is at a crossroads, Greta Thunberg tells Extinction Rebellion Guardian UK reporters reported on Greta Thunberg, the teenage climate activist, who told London protestors that governments will no longer be able ignore the impending climate and ecological crisis
    • Our leaders are ignoring global warming to the point of criminal negligence. It's unforgivable Tim Winton wrote about the difference between the cold war and climate change, and how we can no longer wait patiently for our leaders to catch up.
    • We are not yet doomed: the carbon cutters determined to save the world Guardian correspondents set out to find hopeful climate stories, and found an orchestra, a village, an entire country who are part of the growing movement to rein in greenhouse gas emissions.
    • Buying international permits is a cheap way to cut emissions. It's that simple Katharine Murphy reminded readers that as recently as 2017 the Coalition was in favour of international permits and yet it's now losing its mind over Labor's climate policy.
    • Decades of denial': major report finds New Zealand's environment is in serious trouble Eleanor Ainge Roy reported on how even the nation known for its natural beauty is under pressure with extinctions, polluted rivers and blighted lake.
    • The financial sector must be at the heart of tackling climate change Mark Carney, François Villeroy de Galhau and Frank Elderson discussed a new international report from the Network for Greening the Financial System that demonstrates that the financial industry is key to achieving a low-carbon economy. Only rebellion will prevent an ecological apocalypse George Monbiot on why mass civil disobedience is essential to force a political response now. How anchoring a ship to an ice floe will help fight climate change Robin McKie wrote about Mosaic, a year-long Arctic mission aims to answer fundamental questions about global warming. Glaciers and Arctic ice are vanishing. Time to get radical before it's too late Bill McKibben on why we should all be grateful rather than annoyed when schoolkids start leaving class en masse or surprised that Green New Deal advocates call for dramatic overhaul of society.

Load-Date: May 16, 2019


End of Document




Why we'll sue CEOs who ignore climate change; Environmental lawyers have vowed to pursue legal action against directors who fail to protect their investors from climate risks
The Guardian
October 8, 2015 Thursday 6:18 AM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: GUARDIAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Length: 833 words
Byline: James Thornton
Body


With Shell announcing its withdrawal from the Arctic, the effects of climate change on business performance are everywhere - and it's time corporate leaders consider the implications for their organisation, or face the consequences. 
Business and environmental concerns are becoming the same. Those directors who ignore this risk not only damaging their organisations, but could face legal action holding them personally responsible for their negligence.
Accepted wisdom says that business's short-term mindset and its need to make returns for shareholders make it ill-equipped to take on climate change, the greatest threat facing humanity. Maybe that was true. Now, not only is the environment changing but so is the financial landscape. Strategic-thinking CEOs know they cannot leave climate action to politicians or civil society.
Over a period of just ten days, Shell took a $7bn hit as it admitted it could not make the oil supply pay in the Arctic; Goldman Sachs announced that coal prices are unlikely ever to recover from their current slump; and Mars, Unilever, Kellogg, Nestlé and others wrote to world leaders calling for clear, science-based targets to drive down emissions. They warned that "drought, flooding and hotter growing conditions threaten the world's food supply". 
 Related: Fewer than 50% of CEOs say Paris deal would make them act on climate change
No longer about ethics
The biggest names in the business world are seeing climate change affect their bottom line and the rest will follow.
Climate change is no longer an ethical issue that can be sidelined as a corporate social responsibility project. It has immediate material impact on the operations of businesses today and their planning for the future. 
Last week, the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, delivered a stark warning to the insurance industry, detailing the varied risks global markets face as a result of climate change. He said there are an array of climate challenges faced by the financial community.
These include damage to physical assets from both climate change and the resulting extreme weather events, such as flooding and storms. "Transition risks" will accompany the unavoidable shift to a low-carbon economy, meaning formerly high-value commodities such as fossil fuels become hugely devalued. Finally, liability risks will result when people suffering the effects of climate change seek compensation from polluters.
But these are not only threats to business. Ignoring the risks and opportunities presented by climate change could land chief executives and their advisors in court. If directors fail to manage the impact of climate change on their businesses, they could be found personally liable for losses incurred by their shareholders.
The most obvious liabilities for companies and their directors relate to physical loss or damage. The residents of Tuvalu in the Pacific and Kivalina in Alaska, whose homes are disappearing beneath rising waters, have both threatened challenges against polluters.
Storm damage, such as that inflicted by hurricane Katrina, has also provided the basis for litigation against fossil fuel companies. The science linking extreme weather and climate change is gathering strength and many more such cases will surely follow.
Litigation will not stem only from physically affected parties but also those with a financial interest. Ocean acidification, shifting rainfall patterns and other effects of a changing climate will have implications for all major companies as their physical operations become affected.
 Related: What if we've reached peak globalisation?
These environmental concerns are financial liabilities, and investors will look to litigation to recoup losses if they are mismanaged. Litigation could be brought not only against corporate entities, but also against the individuals steering them.
Company directors' decisions now will affect the performance of their company in the future, and they could find themselves in court charged with breaching their director's duties if they do not manage their company's activities to achieve stability and resilience.
The Companies Act 2006 codifies directors' duties in law for the first time. They must "promote the success of the company", first by considering "the likely consequences of any decision in the long term". Failing to plan for climate change is incompatible with this and other duties and leaves directors open to legal challenge.
The case for climate litigation against reckless directors grows ever stronger. Increased regulation, changing market dynamics and heightened risk to physical assets means maintaining the status quo is no longer an option for those keen to protect their finances and reputation.
We at ClientEarth are closely monitoring the activities of FTSE 250 companies. We will pursue those directors who fail to protect their investors from the challenge that climate change presents. Those intent on following a business-as-usual model, be warned: the "usual" has changed.

Load-Date: October 8, 2015


End of Document




Mathias Cormann nominated for OECD top job despite its criticism of Coalition's climate change policy
The Guardian (London)
October 8, 2020 Thursday 4:35 AM GMT


Copyright 2020 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 591 words
Byline: Katharine Murphy Political editor
Highlight: Australian finance minister says Coalition is committed to climate action and its record will be no barrier to his candidacy of secretary general


Body


Mathias Cormann says the Coalition's heavily criticised record on climate policy won't be a barrier to Australia courting international support for him to be the next secretary general of the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The finance minister, who announced in July that he would quit by the end of the year, leaves the Senate at the end of October, and will be nominated by the Morrison government for the OECD's secretary general's post.
The prime minister confirmed the nomination on Thursday. Cormann will be replaced as finance minister and government leader in the Senate by Simon Birmingham, who will also keep his trade portfolio.
Cormann, who was born in Belgium, put himself on the campaign trail on Thursday. Speaking in French, he declared that the Morrison government was committed to the Paris agreement, and to meeting emissions reduction targets.
Some in the Liberal and National parties have openly queried the science of climate change and the Coalition repealed a carbon price legislated by the Gillard government ( which it characterised as a tax when it wasn't ). Pitched battles about climate policy have prompted internal eruptions leading to Liberal leadership changes since 2009, but Cormann suggested the conversation inside the Coalition had been about the most effective mechanism to reduce emissions.
"The discussion in Australia has not been, as far as we're concerned, about whether or not we are committed to effective action on climate change - we are," Corman said.
"The debate in Australia has always been about what the best method was to most effectively and most appropriately, from an economic point of view, achieve the best possible emissions reductions in an economically sensible fashion."
Cormann said he looked forward to the opportunity, when promoting his candidacy, to counter commentary about the government's record on climate action that he contended was "with respect, not always as well informed as it should be".
The OECD's membership is dominated by European countries, and Australia's record on climate change has been queried and at times criticised by countries with more ambitious emissions reduction commitments.
The government has requested Labor's support to make Cormann's nomination for the position bipartisan.
While Cormann is respected within the parliament, and has a cordial personal relationship with the shadow foreign minister, Penny Wong, built up during their shared time in the Senate, this will be a sensitive issue for Labor.
The Coalition declined to nominate Kevin Rudd when he made a concerted pitch to become the next secretary general of the United Nations. Rudd was furious about the snub, and said Malcolm Turnbull, prime minister at the time, had reneged on previous suggestions of support.
When Turnbull declined to support Rudd, he said that was because he was not suited for the position.
When Morrison was reminded about that history on Thursday, the prime minister said candidates needed to be considered "on their merits and I know Mathias has gained the respect of members all around this place".
Cormann will leave the Senate at the end of the month and go to Europe to lobby for the position. He acknowledged the pandemic would make that lobbying effort more complicated.
 With the elevation of Birmingham to the Senate leadership, the prime minister has appointed Michaelia Cash as deputy leader in the chamber. Morrison confirmed he would reshuffle his ministry at the end of the year - after parliament has risen for the summer.

Load-Date: October 8, 2020


End of Document




Study: Katharine Hayhoe is successfully convincing doubtful evangelicals about climate change; A new study finds that a lecture from evangelical climate scientist Katharine Hayhoe successfully educates evangelical college students, validating the "trusted sources" approach
The Guardian(London)
August 28, 2017 Monday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:1
Length: 1008 words
Byline: Dana Nuccitelli
Body


Approximately one-quarter of Americans identify as evangelical Christians, and that group also tends to be more resistant to the reality of human-caused global warming. As a new paper by Brian Webb and Doug Hayhoe notes:
                       a 2008 study found that just 44% of evangelicals believed global warming to be caused mostly by human activities, compared to 64% of nonevangelicals (Smith and Leiserowitz, 2013) while, a 2011 survey found that only 27% of white evangelicals believed there to be a scientific consensus on climate change, compared to 40% of the American public (Public Religion Research Institute, 2011).                     
These findings appear to stem from two primary factors. First, evangelicals tend to be socially and politically conservative, and climate change is among the many issues that have become politically polarized in America. Second, there is sometimes a perceived conflict between science and religion, as Christians distrust what they perceive as scientists' "moral agenda" on issues like evolution, stem cell research, and climate change. As Webb and Hayhoe describe it:
                       theological conservatism, scientific skepticism, political affiliation, and sociocultural influences have reinforced one another to instill climate skepticism into the evangelical tribe mentality, thus creating a formidable barrier to climate education efforts.                     
                                                           Evangelical climate leaders                                      
There are also evangelicals who have tried to convince their peer group about the reality of human-caused climate change and our moral obligation to address it. These include the Evangelical Environmental Network, the Evangelical Climate Initiative, the Young Evangelicals for Climate Action, and evangelical climate scientists like Sir John Houghton and Doug Hayhoe's daughter Katharine Hayhoe ( one of TIME magazine's 100 most influential people ). However, a majority of evangelicals continue to reject the reality of human-caused climate change, and there hasn't been research quantifying the effectiveness of these evangelical climate leadership efforts.
Brian Webb and Doug Hayhoe's study did just that by testing the effectiveness of a climate lecture delivered by Katharine Hayhoe to undergraduate students at the predominantly evangelical Houghton College in New York. Approximately half of the participants self-identified as conservatives and Republicans, 28% as liberals and Democrats, and the remainder as neither liberal nor conservative. 63% of the participants identified as evangelicals (most of the rest were of other Christian denominations).
Katharine Hayhoe's lecture presented climate science information through the lens of an evangelical tradition. In addition to presenting scientific evidence, it included an introduction about the difference between faith and science (faith is based on things that are spiritually discerned, whereas science is based on observation). About six minutes of the 33- to 53-minute lectures were devoted to theology-based ethics.
                                        Hayhoe lecture's effectiveness                                      
The participants filled out a survey before and after the lecture, detailing their acceptance that global warming is happening, its cause, whether there's a scientific consensus, how high of a priority they consider it, how worried they are about it, and how much it will harm various groups. The results showed an increase in pro-climate beliefs for every single question after listening to Katharine Hayhoe's lecture.
Acceptance that global warming is happening increased for 48% of participants, and that humans are causing it for 39%. Awareness of the expert scientific consensus increased among 27% of participants. 52% were more worried about climate change after watching the lecture, and 67% increased their responses about how much harm climate change will do. 55% of participants viewed addressing climate change a higher priority after attending Katharine Hayhoe's lecture. For most of the remaining participants, there was no change in responses to these questions.
By testing three different lecture approaches, Webb and Hayhoe also concluded that the lecture was equally effective when presented in person or as a recorded video, and that adding material about common climate misconceptions didn't make the lecture any more effective.
                                        Facts matter - especially when they come from trusted sources                                      
There's been some debate among social scientists about how much facts matter in today's politically polarized society. Some have warned about the "smart idiots" effect, in which people who are more knowledgeable are often less persuadable, essentially because they have more tools with which to reject information they find inconvenient. However, other research has shown that climate-specific knowledge does increase peoples' acceptance of human-caused global warming. The question then becomes how to arm people with that climate-specific knowledge.
One thing most social scientists agree on is that people are more open to information when it comes from "trusted sources" - people with whom they have shared values. For evangelicals, Katharine Hayhoe is a perfect example, and this study confirms that her lectures are effective at informing evangelical college students about climate change.
Other climate scientists can follow Hayhoe's successful example by identifying groups whose membership is predominantly skeptical about human-caused global warming, with whom the individual scientist shares a commonality that will make him or her a trusted source of information. This could consist of religious beliefs, political leanings, or other shared values. This study has shown that the trusted source approach is an effective one at breaking through individuals' resistance to the realities of human-caused climate change. 

Load-Date: August 28, 2017


End of Document




Losing paradise: the people displaced by atomic bombs, and now climate change; People in the Pacific Marshall Islands and Kiribati are facing oblivion as the sea around them rises, and they are already suffering from food shortages, droughts and floods. Karl Mathiesen reports from the frontline of climate crisis
The Guardian
March 17, 2015 Tuesday 5:08 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT
Length: 2774 words
Byline: Karl Mathiesen in the Marshall Islands and Kiribati
Body


In 1946 an American commodore gathered Lirok Joash and her people together and asked them to temporarily leave their homes on Bikini Atoll. The US needed somewhere to test its atomic bombs. It would be, said the navy man, "for the good of mankind and to end all world wars".
Eight years later US scientists detonated Castle Bravo, the massive, bungled hydrogen bomb that would gouge a crater more than half a mile wide and make Bikini uninhabitable for decades, perhaps centuries. A calculating error created a blast equivalent to detonating 15 megatonnes of TNT, the bomb was the largest ever detonated by the United States - about 1,000 times larger than the bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the end of the second world war.
Joash was 20-years-old when she left Bikini. She has been forced to relocate by radiation or unsuitable living conditions five times - including a brief and disastrous return to a still radioactive Bikini in the 1970s. Now, at 89, she is the oldest of the Bikini population forced to move by the nuclear tests. Her memories of the atoll have now grown dim.
"I don't think she'll make it until the next return," says Joash's grandson Alson Kelen, a former mayor of the Bikinian council-in-exile. "I don't think I'll make it. I don't think my children or my grandchildren will make it. The dream that we would return already faded away a few years ago."
The Bikinians, most of whom will never see Bikini, live scattered across the Marshall Islands, a collection of 24 atolls in the Western Pacific. Joash, Kelen and 200 of their people now live on Ejit, a tiny low-lying islet set aside for the Bikinians near the Marshall Islands' capital atoll Majuro.
"We've been kicked around for a while, for the last almost 70 years," says Kelen. "And until now living in these tight communities here is the best we can get. And it's so sad. It's so sad. Because every time we look at this we feel like we're sailors on a voyage, we're still right in the middle of the ocean."
And the ocean, driven by climate change, is rising.
Across the Pacific, the subtle, unremitting first impacts of the climate crisis are already strangling lives. Later this year in Paris, the world's leaders will attempt to produce an agreement that will secure the global climate. But secure for whom?
Floods washed over Ejit three times in 2014. Kelen fears that before long, his people will be moving again.
"It's the same story. Nuclear time, we were relocated. Climate change, we will be relocated. It's the same harshness affecting us," he says.
In the Marshall Islands almost everyone lives within a few hundred metres of the sea and less than three metres above it. Inundations have destroyed homes and crops. Droughts of extraordinary intensity and length have necessitated food and water drops. Fresh water grows scarcer.
People are trying to defend their land by planting mangroves, and Sisyphean sea walls are built and rebuilt. But people's thoughts are turning from adaptation and resilience toward a climate exodus. Scientists predict that in 30 years, life here will be so uncomfortable most people will leave. A notion the Marshallese abhor. The Bikinian calamity serves as a national warning that homelands, once lost, cannot be replaced.
"If the land doesn't exist, what happens to these people for whom the land is the most integral thing? For the answer, just look at the Bikinians," says Jack Niedenthal, the liason officer for the Bikini Trust.
Marshallese foreign minister Tony de Brum, who has emerged as a champion of the global climate movement, says:  "Displacement is not an option we relish or cherish and we will not operate on that basis. We will operate on the basis that we can in fact help to prevent this from happening."
But politics and atmospheric physics are running away from the Marshallese. In March 2014 almost 100 homes on the capital atoll Majuro were destroyed by a combination of high tide and big swell. More than 900 people were placed in shelters. Families have since returned to live in homes half collapsed into the sea.
"I can tell you right now that all of those [inundation] events that have occurred in the Marshall Islands can be attributed to sea level rise," says Reginald White, the director of the Marshall Islands National Weather Service. On the pancake flat atolls, three centimetres of sea level rise will cause a flood to spread inland a further 30 metres.
The higher sea level combines with seasonal high tides (known as king tides), large swells and high winds to push water on to the land. During La Niña years (part of the couple of ocean-atmosphere phenomenon that affects weather globally and includes El Niño) the seas can rise up to 30cm above normal. The last decade of predominantly La Niña conditions has offered a bleak curtain raiser for things to come.
"We are seeing more extreme events today than we used to see in the 60s, 70s and 80s. Even without La Niña we still receive inundations," says White.
                     Some scientists predict climate change will cause more intense and more frequent El Niño and La Niña events - although this is less certain than sea level rise. El Niño events are typically followed by dry periods in the Marshall Islands. During 2013, after a very weak El Niño, the northern atolls were hit by a severe drought. Food and water were delivered to desperate communities. Production of coconut oil, one of the countries only exports, fell by almost a third, a loss of close to US$2.5m (£1.6m) or 1.5% of GDP.
"If there is another drought then the industry will be gone. That will really effect everything here," says Mison Levai, the marketing manager of the national coconut oil producer Tobolar. This will not only be bad news for the 70 employees of Tobolar's refinery in Majuro. For the 20,000 people who live on the rural coconut-growing 'outer atolls' the equation is simple. No coconuts, no income.
On the outer atoll of Arno, families work together every day, six days a week, collecting fallen drupes, removing the husks, skilfully shucking the flesh (called copra) and drying it in makeshift ovens. It is then shipped to Majuro to be turned into oil and exported.
Torrak Anton, a copra farmer, uses a stick to scratch the arithmetic of his poverty in the dirt of the road. After food, rent and contributions to the copra dealer and island chief, he is left with $34 a week for the seven people in his household. During times of drought the coconuts shrink and the money for clothing, housing and education disappears.
Without copra, outer islanders will be reduced to a subsistence survival, eked from the land, supplemented by fishing and likely made impossible by tidal inundations. Already 1,200-1,400 people are reported to have moved from rural atolls to district centres - exacerbating overcrowding and making flooding in the capital Majuro more damaging.
Depending on how sharply the world cuts carbon emissions, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) predicts the global mean sea level will rise by 26-82cm between now and 2100. The IPCC concluded in 2013 that even if the increasingly quixotic-looking "safe" limit of 2C of global warming were somehow achieved by the Paris talks, the sea would continue to wash over Kiribati and the Marshall Islands. What the rest of the world considers acceptable climate change is, quite simply, a disaster for atoll dwellers.
In spite of De Brum's refusal to countenance a national evacuation, White says the Marshall Islands are likely to become unliveable for all but a hardy few before the midway point of this century.
"What is the exact definition of habitable? It gets to a point where the extreme events become so frequent that it becomes very uncomfortable to make a good living," he says.
The people of Kiribati (pronounced Ki-ri-bas) are the Marshall Islands' fellows on the low road to climate oblivion. The capital atoll Tarawa is overcrowded and underdeveloped, even compared to Majuro. Rita Kaimwata, a 27-year-old mother of two (soon to be three), lives in a typical Kiribati home of driftwood, salvaged timber and palm thatching. Her tiny block of land in the village of Temwaiku is separated from the Pacific Ocean by a thin dirt road and a hump of sand less than a metre high.
Like many Tarawans, the Kaimwata's access to food and fresh water is tenuous. Their diet of rice and fish is supplemented by whatever vegetables they can grow. Every second day, for one hour, the government pumps treated drinking water and the family fill up a small tank. This precious water must be kept for keeping hydrated in the punishing equatorial heat.
For bathing, dishes, clothes and watering vegetables there is a well that taps the thin layer of fresh water (called a lens) a couple of metres below the ground. But last year (and again a few months ago) the sea swept over the road, through the Kaimwata's home, across their cabbages and into the well. Now nothing grows.
Set against scientific warnings of a future of catastrophic climate change events (such as typhoon Haiyan and hurricane Sandy ) the loss of a vegetable patch seems insignificant. But for Kaimwata's children the link between food, water and rising sea levels is profound and the margin between life and death could be as fine as the ability to grow a few cabbages.
Kaimwata, like many residents (called i-Kiribati), giggles to hide distress. "I laugh because sometimes we believe that in 20 or 30 years our country will be gone forever. But it's not funny." Devoid of rock and substantial natural defences, this is among the most marginal of all regular human habitats.
Nearly a decade of regular inundations has caused parts of Tarawa's already thin and polluted water lens to turn salty. Clean water is almost non-existent. Crops have died. Between 2005 and 2010, the number of malnourished multiplied eight times. In September, an outbreak of rotavirus from bad water infected 2,513 children under five years old. Seven were killed.
Kaimwata looks around at her children and her neighbours' children: "Only the children get sick. Many children die in Kiribati when they get the diarrhoea." More than a third of i-Kiribati are under 15.
The water situation is desperate. Water is being drawn from the freshwater lens 20% faster than rain replaces it. Bacteria from open defecation (there are few toilets), industrial and domestic chemicals and seawater contaminate all water sources - including the government supply. Only 60% of the atoll's population receive rations of 'clean' government water. The other 23,000 rely solely on well water that Tarawa's director of public health Patrick Timeon describes as "grossly unsafe". 
"The enormity of water-associated disease and death has not been fully assessed," says Timeon, but the direct and indirect impacts are "colossal". He begs for assistance to raise just £70,000 for two desalination plants that could provide safe water to the entire population.
Kiribati's president Anote Tong is frank. Years of failed talks and prevarication by industrialised countries have shaken his belief in the UN process. The land, homes and futures of his people (like the Bikinians before them) have been deemed the price of doing business, the acceptable cost of delaying the end of the carbon economy. In contrast to De Brum, he is already working on encouraging his people to leave.
"If what will happen in Paris will deal with the case of the most vulnerable countries like us, then maybe we have some guarantee that we will be able to stay. But if we don't, I'm not going to put the future of my country on the outcome and the whims and wishes of those countries to decide. We've got to plan ahead. The old saying wish for the best but plan for the worst," he says.
The countries' contrary rhetoric on climate change is partly informed by their differing migration opportunities. The Marshallese have a compact of free association with the US, meaning they can resettle as they wish. But the i-Kiribati have few avenues of emigration. Tong's despairing statements are partly designed to goad Kiribati's major donor countries Australia and New Zealand to open their borders to his people.
His plan for the worst, encourages young people to learn a profession and 'migrate with dignity'. "We have to relocate people because the landmass is going to decline. That's common sense. Simple common sense ... I can say that I refuse to move, but that's being stupid isn't it? Because it will not be me that will be affected. It will be my grandchildren," he says.
Even now, it is not difficult to find the suffering grandchildren of Kiribati. Between Tong's modest parliament and Kaimwata's home is Tarawa's hospital. The overloaded facility desperately needs modernisation and expansion. People sleep on the floor or outside on the ground. Cats roam the wards and ants swarm around dripping taps. In a corner of the paediatrics wing, panting slowly in the heat, lies one-year-old Atanimatang Atanimatang.
He fell sick during the rotavirus outbreak in September and his little body has wrestled against the diarrhoea and fever caused by the virus for four months. He shows signs of kwashiorkor, a type of malnutrition commonly found in regions hit by famine. His mother Katewea Atanimatang watches her son's febrile sleep. They receive government water, she says, but when it is not available they are forced to drink from the well. She looks exhausted and sad.
When I contacted one of his nurses in the days before publication, Atanimatang had recovered slightly. He may yet live long enough to go to school, attend church, marry and have children - like most other i-Kiribati and Marshallese. But if he does, it's likely he'll also live to see his homeland evacuated.
The elders are distraught that this loss is being committed to their young. The Reverend Eria Maerierie is an old man. He won't live to see his country's loss. But he has a long enough memory to know that things have changed. If the tide is high on a Sunday he now conducts services in a church surrounded by water. And he rages against the apathy behind the rising sea.
"We are suffering in this part of the world from what those people in the rich world are working with gases. And its consequences fell on us in the Pacific. They have been selfish, thinking of what they can achieve with gas. What can we do? We just live with that dying feeling in our hearts. Our voice is nothing to them."
Will the atolls disappear?
The most widely-reported and possibly most misleading 'effect of climate change' in atoll nations is erosion. It's a striking, media-friendly narrative, climate change we can see. Homes undermined by rising seas, beaches scoured back to the coral shelf and coconut trees felled by salt poisoning. But the evidence showing a clear link between the last century of sea level rise and erosion is far from conclusive.
Research on the erosion of atolls really only began in 2011. The University of Aukland's Murray Ford has compared aerial photography from the second world war with current satellite images and the results may surprise some. Despite a small but significant sea level rise of 20cm last century, Ford found that the last half of the century saw a general (although not uniform) trend of accretion across 100 Pacific atolls. The islands are getting bigger.
"All the research that's come out in the last few years has shown that the islands aren't eroding away. It's kind of counter intuitive," says Ford. "The conventional models show that they should be eroding, but the current observations show that they aren't."
Rather than being the indisputable first effects of climate change, all the photos of dead palms and disappearing beaches attest to the extreme fragility of these landforms to change.
 Related: Climate change in the Marshall Islands and Kiribati, before and after - interactive
It is likely that on densely-populated Tarawa and Majuro, causeways, shoreline developments and dredging have much more influence on local erosion than sea level. Confirmation bias also plays a part in both the islanders' perceptions and the reporting from these islands. The eye isn't drawn so easily to the places where the sand is piling up. Any erosion is accepted as proof of the climate change narrative.
But just because the islands are growing now, doesn't mean they won't suddenly begin eroding when the sea reaches a certain height. At the moment though, the disappearance of land is less of a threat than the loss of habitable land, says Ford.
"The inundation risk continues to rise and it's highly likely that they'll be frequently inundated well before they are eroded away," he says. 

Load-Date: March 17, 2015


End of Document




Come on, UK weather forecasters - tell it like it is on climate change; People have a right to know what's behind their flooding or heatwave. The UK is lagging behind other countries
The Guardian(London)
March 20, 2019 Wednesday 1:51 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:1
Length: 822 words
Byline: Adam Corner
Body


They have a national reach that most climate campaigners would die for. They are familiar and respected experts on the science of meteorology. And they have prime-time slots at the end of almost every TV news bulletin, morning, noon and night. But the weather forecasters who guide everything from our clothing choices to our weekend plans seldom - if ever - mention the issue that is increasingly shaping our beloved British weather: climate change.
This week, former BBC weatherman Bill Giles broke cover, and called for the BBC and other major broadcasters to overhaul their approach to forecasts, and add in information about the crucial context of climate change to their predictions about the daily weather.
While the weather can't always straightforwardly be equated with a changing climate, the impacts of climate change are no longer a hypothetical concern, or a discussion for the future. Climate change is with us now, and is manifesting through rising temperatures, more            violent and unpredictable storms, and            heavier rainfall.
What Giles rightly highlighted is that while weather forecasting continues to operate in a vacuum while the climate changes around us, it is abdicating its duty to provide accurate, scientifically-grounded meteorological advice to the public. Don't people have a right to know how their climate is changing? And aren't weather forecasts the obvious place to alert us to these new risks that we face?
In fact, the UK is lagging far behind many other countries in terms of integrating what we know about climate change with the information provided to the public about the weather. In the notoriously polarised US, a brilliant programme led by George Mason University in Virginia and Climate Central has supported more than 600 TV meteorologists to contextualise their weather forecasts with information about the changing climate.
Similar successes have been seen in Australia, where a programme run out of Monash University provides localised climate information in their weather segments. In Belgium, the weather forecaster            Jill Peters has made a career from campaigning on climate change. So the silence from British broadcasters is troubling, and Giles's intervention is long overdue.
In a sense, the broadcasters' nervousness is understandable - for a long time, it simply wasn't possible to make definitive statements about the relationship between weather and climate. Communicators were faced with a catch-22 situation: make speculative statements about extreme weather and climate change, or sit on their hands while the very changes scientists had been predicting for decades materialised around them.
But the science of ''attributing'' weather events to climate change has accelerated rapidly. It is now possible to say with confidence how much more likely (or how much more intense) a storm, or a heatwave, was made by climate change. Statements about the links between weather and climate still need to be made carefully, and in line with the science. But this kind of probabilistic, risk-based guidance is the bread and butter of TV weather forecasters, and they're the perfect people to give audiences an insight into how the climate is changing.
None of this means that accurate information about the risks of climate change is a panacea for public engagement on climate change. Its now well understood (and more than ever in thisera of "fake news") that accurate evidence alone is unlikely to move the dial for people who don't want to hear it. And simply hammering people with information about the risks of climate change could be counterproductive.
The social science of climate communication points to the importance of striking a motivating balance between hope and fear in public messages. In practice, this means not only raising the alarm about the often terrifying consequences of a changing climate, but also providing advice and support on what people can do to save more energy, waste less food, or lobby their MP to prioritise climate change.
Clearly, our humble weather forecasters can't do this all on their own. But the inspiring rise of the school strike movement is proof of the frustration and urgency with which young people view the issue that will define their lives, and suggests the era of side lining climate change as something that environmentalists worry about, while the rest of us get on with our lives, may finally be coming to an end.
From the way we eat, travel and heat our homes, to the conventions that govern our weather forecasts, climate change needs to move from the margins and into the mainstream - and fast. A daily public narrative that joins the dots between the weather patterns we see outside our windows, and the unprecedented changes now under way in the global climate, is one crucial piece of this puzzle.
 Adam Corner is the research director at Climate Outreach and an honorary research fellow in the School of Psychology, Cardiff University

Load-Date: March 20, 2019


End of Document




Australia's authority in Pacific 'being eroded by refusal to address climate change'; Top climate scientist says leaders disenchanted with Australia's promotion of coal and slowing down action on meeting Paris targets
The Guardian(London)
September 6, 2018 Thursday 7:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:4
Length: 1124 words
Byline: Ben Doherty
Body


Australia's regional authority and influence is being eroded by its refusal to address  the threat climate change poses to many of its Pacific neighbours, according to a pre-eminent climate scientist.
As part of the Pacific Islands Forum, Australia was a signatory to the Boe declaration in Nauru on Wednesday which said            climate change represented "the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific".
But Australia attempted to water down the language of the declaration, other Pacific countries have said, resisting language around urgent action to cut emissions, and issued qualifications to part of the            Pacific Islands Forum communique over the Paris climate agreement.
The prime minister of Tuvalu, Enele Sopoaga, said the name of the country seeking qualifications "[started] with capital A". Australia is the only country in the PIF beginning with A.
Several sources from the PIF forum have corroborated Australia's efforts to weaken the Boe Declaration. Vanuatu's minister for foreign affairs Ralph Regenvanu said: "I was there, and can confirm this is true. And unfortunate."
Asked specifically by Guardian Australia whether Australia had sought to weaken the language of the declaration, Australia's foreign minister Marise Payne neither rejected nor confirmed the allegation.
"The communique is an agreed document of the Leaders' Retreat. It is not appropriate to discuss the internal talks of the private Leaders' Retreat. Pacific Island Forum leaders' discussions are typically robust and frank and canvas a broad range of issues, including regional security, economic growth, climate change, fisheries and disaster response."
Payne said Australia understood the centrality of the climate threat to many Pacific Islands, and "the importance that Pacific countries place on effective global action to combat climate change".
Australia has pledged $300 million for climate change action in the Pacific between 2016 and 2020, and has also contributed $200 million to the Green Climate Fund.
Dr Bill Hare, managing director of Climate Analytics and a lead author on the IPCC fourth assessment report, told Guardian Australia that Pacific leaders were growing increasingly disenchanted with Australia's refusal to commit to cutting carbon emissions, even as their nations faced massive economic, physical and social disruption, even existential threat.
"The leaders are not fools, and they are increasingly confronted by the problems of climate change, in all its different dimensions," Hare said. "The problem for Australia is it doesn't have credibility on climate. Australia is an important player for many of the Pacific Island countries, well-respected and well-liked by the populations and the political leaders, but on climate change there is a chasm opening up.
"I hear it from Pacific leaders all the time: they are fighting to save their countries and their people and they cannot understand why the Australian government leadership can't see the problems they've got."
Hare said while the language in the Boe declaration was strong, the real test for Australia would be in its actions to address its own emissions, and in helping the Pacific with adaptation.
"The actions will not match the gravity of the declaration or the gravity of the need. There is a credibility gap: Australia is not acting on reducing its own emissions. All the leaders know that whenever the prime minister or energy minister says Australia will meet its Paris targets 'in a canter', that that it is wrong, it is factually incorrect - it is bullshit.
"They know Australia is working to slow down action on meeting Paris targets, they know Australia is promoting coal, and they know it's going to cause a climate catastrophe. Australia has dedicated and able diplomats across the region, but the political leadership of the government is so far removed from reality, it opens up major problems for the country."
Pacific leaders were confronting losing large proportions of their territory, and the forcible displacement of their populations, Hare said. He said leaders did not want their next generations to grow up dislocated, living in foreign cities like Sydney and Auckland, with the attendant loss of identity, culture and self-esteem.
Support for Australia could ebb away, with Pacific Islands looking to other benefactors - in particular China - which has made massive in its aid spending and diplomatic engagement in the region. China is set to overtake Australia as the largest donor to the Pacific, after pledging US$4bn in aid to the region last year.
But climate action is acutely politically sensitive for the Australian government, having just abandoned the National Energy Guarantee - which would have mandated emissions cuts - and new prime minister Scott Morrison facing pressure from some members within his own party to abandon Australia's Paris agreement targets.
Morrison said specific emissions reductions targets were not necessary to meet Australia's Paris goals: "the business-as-usual model gets us there in a canter".
That directly contradicts advice from the government's own Energy Security Board that says business as usual will mean the electricity sector will "fall short of the emissions reduction target of 26% below 2005 levels".
The Australian Conservation Foundation chief executive officer, Kelly O'Shanassy, said Australia's Boe declaration commitment was welcomed but must be matched by domestic action.
"It's not surprising that Pacific leaders have been unhappy with Australia on climate change with the Morrison government turning up at the Pacific Islands Forum with no real plan to cut our domestic pollution and without a clear indication that it intends to develop one."
Ahead of the Pacific Islands Forum, Xavier Matsutaro, the national climate change coordinator for Palau, said Australia's relationship with the Pacific was "dysfunctional" and akin to an abusive spouse, saying Australia was also responsible for diluting the strength of previous regional declarations on climate change.
"Australia is a bit of an anomaly, because on the floor [of climate summits] they're basically sometimes as far right as Trump in some of their views on climate change ... but then on a regional basis they've actually given a lot of support to our region."
Hare said Matsutaro spoke the "real and growing truth" about Pacific sentiment towards Australia.
"It reflects a major political and diplomatic crisis in the Pacific. If Pacific leaders lose faith in Australia, then they will turn to others, and this is already becoming a major source of discussion. Pacific leaders are not naive about the strings that will come with development from China, but they are beginning to feel abandoned."

Load-Date: September 7, 2018


End of Document




Republicans finally admitted climate change is real: so what will they do about it?; In a vote last month 15 Republican senators agreed that climate change is caused by human activity. Only three were ready to state how they would tackle it and none suggested a target for cutting greenhouse gas emissions
The Guardian
February 3, 2015 Tuesday 1:16 PM GMT


Copyright 2015 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS
Length: 1281 words
Byline: Suzanne Goldenberg in Washington
Body


It seemed like a simple idea at first: ask Republicans what they would do about climate change. 
Late last month, some Republicans in the Senate finally admitted climate change is real. A small minority of 15 Republican senators agreed with the rest of the world that it is caused by human activity.
So what were they going to do about it? The senators didn't know, or they weren't telling - yet. "You are going to find people very hesitant to talk about this," an aide to one Republican senator said. The aide was right.
Only three of the 15 Republicans came forward with ideas for climate solutions, when asked by the Guardian.
Those three Republicans - Senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Susan Collins of Maine, and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee - suggested a range of measures from building more nuclear power stations, promoting energy efficiency, and encouraging investment in technological research.
Crucially, none of the Republicans proposed a target for cutting greenhouse gas emissions - which cause climate change.
And none of the Republicans backed Barack Obama's plan to cut carbon pollution from power plants.
They argued Obama was going about fighting climate change all wrong.
"My disagreement with the Obama administration is over its wrongheaded approach to solving this problem by proposing to deliberately raise the price of energy and construct a complicated cap-and-trade system," Alexander said in an emailed statement which also affirmed that human activity was a driver of climate change.
His suggestion was to build 100 new nuclear reactors, to provide emissions-free power, and double government-sponsored research.
Murkowski opposed building more reactors without first establishing a permanent respository for nuclear waste, a spokesman said.
He said she supported "responsible efforts" to reduce emissions. "What Senator Murkowski has said is that we ought to have a no regrets policy that can reduce emissions but also won't have a negative impact on the American economy, competitiveness and the weekly budgets of American families," the spokesman said.
She opposed a carbon tax.
Susan Collins of Maine said the answer was in promoting domestic clean energy and efficiency. "By promoting clean, domestic energy alternatives and efficiency, we can reduce pollution, advance the goal of energy independence for our nation, and spur the creation of new manufacturing jobs in America," the senator said in a statement.
"I've always maintained that it is a false choice to pit the environment versus the economy," she went on.
A fourth Republican, John Hoeven of North Dakota, who proposed but eventually voted against one of the climate votes, supported carbon capture technology, a spokesman said.
All the other senators were no-shows including John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina who have in the past sponsored bills to put economy-wide limits on carbon pollution through cap-and-trade measures. Both of those attempts ended in defeat.
But there were signs that the Republican wall of denial about climate change was beginning to come down, said Brian Schatz, a Hawaii Democrat who put forward one of the climate change votes in the Senate last month.
Those votes - during the debate over the Keystone XL pipeline - for the first time in years saw Republicans abandoning denial to debate policies of climate change.
"We shouldn't be Pollyanas about converting anyone from denier to activist but I think we converted people from denier to non-denier," Schatz said. "People are going to have to move in increments. You can't expect people taking a position just about as extreme as you could find would suddenly agree with me on all energy matters."
He went on, "Republicans understand they can't ignore the problem any more and I think they feel on firmer ground if they disagree on policy rather than a set of facts that is well established."
The votes saw virtually the entire Senate - except for a lone hold-out, Mississippi Republican Roger Wicker - vote that climate change was real and not a hoax.
Fifteen Republican senators voted with Democrats that climate change was caused in part by human activity. Five Republican senators voted with Democrats that human activity was the main driver of climate change - which is in line with scientific opinion. Two Republican senators voted with Democrats against a measure seeking to void a US-China deal to cut carbon pollution.
Sheldon Whitehouse, a Rhode Island Democrat who also proposed a vote on climate change, said the Republicans were now in disarray on the issue.
"They are all over the place. There is one who says it's not even happening. There are the others who say the climate is changing, but we have nothing to do with it. There are others who say the climate is changing and we have something to do with it. And then there are others who say the climate is changing and we have a lot to do with it and we should do something about it," he said.
Whitehouse argued Republicans were now caught between, on one side, powerful corporate interests and the conservative Tea Party wing - which continues to deny the existence of climate change - and on the other, public opinion, which breaks in favour of action on climate change.
A number of the Republicans who broke ranks on climate change are from states Obama won in 2012 and are facing tight re-election contests in 2016.
"I think the fact that so many felt they needed to vote for the amendments shows that many realise they are being perceived as anti-science and anti-reality and that is not playing that well back home," said Alden Meyer, director of strategy for the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Two-thirds of American voters would reject a candidate who denies the existence of human-caused climate change, according to a Stanford University poll released last week. 
There could well be other Republicans in Congress who disagree with the party mainstream on climate change - but who are not yet ready to go public, said Jim Brainard, the Republican mayor of Carmel, Indiana, and a longtime supporter of action on climate change.
"I'm sure out of 535 members of Congress there are people in there who agree with me," he said. "It's abundantly clear that the climate is changing and we are going to be behind the eight ball on those changes we have to make, and the people who have taken these unrealistic views will not be re-elected."
The 15 Republicans who acknowledged the human contribution to climate change included: Senators Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Susan Collins of Maine, Bob Corker of Tennessee, Jeff Flake of Arizona, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Orrin Hatch of Utah, Dean Heller of Nevada, Mark Kirk of Illinois, John McCain of Arizona, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Rand Paul of Kentucky, Rob Portman of Ohio, Mike Rounds of South Dakota, and Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania.
Five of those senators voted that human activity was a significant cause of climate change. They were: Alexander, Ayotte, Collins, Graham and Kirk.
Ayotte and Collins also voted against the measure seeking to void the US-China climate deal and block Obama from pursuing an international climate change treaty.
The ideas that have come out from the breakaway Republicans so far do not yet add up to a credible alternative to Obama's vision for fighting climate change. "They don't like the EPA rules. They don't like the cap-and-trade bill," said Meyer. "They got tired of saying: 'I am not a scientist', but it's not really there yet."
He went on: "It is like AA. The first step is admitting you have a problem. Those 15 Republicans have now admitted: 'We have a problem.' The question is: what are we going to do about it?"

Load-Date: February 3, 2015


End of Document




Australia needs policy to deal with health effects of climate change, Chris Bowen says; Labor's health spokesman says the country and the world have not moved quickly enough to reduce emissions
The Guardian(London)
November 19, 2019 Tuesday 5:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2019 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: ENVIRONMENT; Version:2
Length: 779 words
Byline: Katharine Murphy, Political editor
Body


Australia needs to develop policies and structures to prepare for the health impacts of climate change because we have not moved quickly enough - domestically or internationally - to reduce emissions and mitigate the risk, Labor's health spokesman, Chris Bowen, believes.
Bowen will use a lecture at Sydney University on Wednesday night to argue a health response to climate change would not be necessary if there was a robust international policy response to emissions. "But the world, and Australia, has failed to act with appropriate seriousness and haste, and so we will need specific policies to deal with the health impacts of climate change," he will say.
A copy of the lecture shows Bowen will point to estimates that by 2030, 250,000 people around the world will die each year as a direct result of a warming planet.
But what was often missing from the public debate in Australia "is an understanding that severe climate change, of the type the globe is currently on track to experience, isn't just about the frequency and severity of weather events".
"It is about changing climate zones, desertification, ocean acidification, ecosystem collapse; these impacts threaten our food supply, our economy, our security and of course our health," it says.
"As some have put it, climate change is so dangerous to health that it threatens to unwind 50 years of progress in improving public health outcomes, as well as adaptation to already unavoidable impacts from climate change."
Bowen will argue that climate change means more prevalent natural disasters and heatwaves in a country already prone to both, and the arrival of disease: "Countries not so far to our north are prone to vector-borne diseases. It would not take too much more of an increase in temperature for us to be prone to those diseases."
He will challenge the Morrison government to add climate change to the list of national health priorities. There are nine priority areas agreed between the commonwealth and the states - cancer control, cardiovascular health, injury prevention, mental health, diabetes mellitus, arthritis and musculoskeletal conditions, obesity and dementia - and the health minister, Greg Hunt, has proposed a 10th: medicines safety.
Bowen will say adding climate change "would raise awareness of the importance of the challenge of climate change health and set out a road map for dealing with it".
The United States, a climate laggard under the Trump administration, has a significant program of climate change, disease control and prevention research, and Britain also has a sustainable development strategy: "But in Australia we have no such equivalent.
"This is despite the fact we are more exposed than most, and our medical community is increasingly vocal on the issue, from Doctors for the Environment, to the Australian Medical Association, which recently declared climate change to be a health emergency."
Guardian Australia revealed in September that the AMA had formally declared climate change a health emergency, pointing to "clear scientific evidence indicating severe impacts for our patients and communities now and into the future".
The landmark shift, delivered by a motion of its federal council, brought the organisation into line with forward-leaning positions taken by the American Medical Association, the British Medical Association and Doctors for the Environment Australia.
The American Medical Association and the American College of Physicians recognised climate change as a health emergency in June 2019, and the following month the British Medical Association declared a climate emergency and committed to campaign for carbon neutrality by 2030.
The World Health Organisation has recognised since 2015 that climate change was the greatest threat to global health in the 21st century, and argued the scientific evidence for that assessment was "overwhelming".
The AMA president, Tony Bartone, said climate change meant higher mortality and morbidity from heat stress, injuries and mortalities from severe weather, increases in the transmission of vector-borne diseases, food insecurity resulting from declines in agricultural outputs, and higher incidences of mental ill health.
Bowen will say he has been struck in his first six months in the health portfolio by the number of clinicians and medicos who have engaged him on climate change. 
"As one senior doctor put it me powerfully recently: 'Doctors listen to the science of the climate change and its health impacts like we listen to the science of vaccination and the impacts of not vaccinating. They are as clear as each other, and ignoring the science of climate change would be akin to supporting anti-vaxxers.' "

Load-Date: November 19, 2019


End of Document
