




Climate change threatens Canada's dams - but who's keeping track?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 8, 2020 Thursday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 3102 words
Byline: MATTHEW MCCLEARN
Body


Lead
On a hot summer afternoon, the North Maitland River in Southwestern Ontario trickles lazily past crumbling concrete. The Gorrie Dam - what's left of it - awaits removal.
Its destruction had been long foretold. Following a damaging flood in 1974, engineers concluded that neither its spillways nor its earthen dikes had been constructed properly; the silty sand and gravel on which they rested allowed water to seep through.
Texte/Text
An engineer from the Ministry of Natural Resources concluded that the dam would eventually fail.
In 2017, amid heavy rains leading to the second-highest flows on the river in half a century, it finally did. Flood waters overtopped and eroded its emergency spillway, and damaged its concrete structure.
Luckily, this failure unfolded gradually; it didn't release a massive pulse of water that might have damaged other infrastructure downstream. As it was, other owners throughout the area were struggling to prevent failures of their own dams, a fate that was narrowly avoided.
Such incidents will likely arrive more frequently as Canada's aging dams continue on a collision course with a warming climate.
There are more than 14,000 dams across Canada, with significant concentrations in Quebec, Ontario and British Columbia.
Many date from the early and mid-20th century. While some are well-maintained and were built to withstand extreme events, others have deteriorated beyond hope of restoration.
They are at risk of failing even during moderate rainfall, let alone the massive deluges that are becoming increasingly commonplace.
The extent of the problem is obscured by a massive data gap.
Dams fall largely under provincial jurisdiction, and while the rigour of supervision varies considerably, most provinces publish little information that could be used to identify poorly maintained dams, or assess what might happen if they fail.
But the available evidence suggests the Gorrie Dam was no anomaly. A report by engineering firm Greck and Associates Ltd. following its failure noted that Ontario alone has more than 5,000 dams and weirs.
"Many dams are approaching or have exceeded their normal life expectancy," the report noted.
"They are in poor condition and no longer provide their originally intended function. They present risks to public safety, owner liability issues, and impacts to the natural environment."
Evidence from around the globe establishes that ignoring dams until they fail can be a costly and hazardous error. An alternative - decommissioning and removing them - is often cheapest. But it's also politically unpopular, and hasn't yet caught on in Canada.
DAM BLINDNESS In May, the Edenville Dam and Sanford Dam in Michigan breached amid heavy rainfall, leading to flooding and evacuations of nearby towns. The New York Times reported that the flood waters inundated parts of a large chemical complex and threatened the site of a major toxic cleanup.
Failures of this magnitude are mercifully rare: According to a 2018 study by the National Performance of Dams Program at Stanford University, since 1980 the U.S. has experienced an average of 24 failures annually. When they do occur, however, major failures prompt re-evaluations.
The Michigan incident sparked a flurry of reports reminding Americans that their country is littered with vulnerable dams.
According to a national inventory maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, nearly 25,000 of the more than 90,000 dams in the country have hazard ratings of "high" or "significant," meaning their failures might cause loss of human life, property damage or environmental destruction.
Critics complain that the true extent of the problem in the U.S.
is obscured by a lack of data. But if the U.S. has blind spots, Canada is almost entirely blind.
To begin with, Canada lacks a national inventory and has no body equivalent to the Army Corps of Engineers. The closest thing Canadians have is a list from the Canadian Dam Association of fewer than 1,200 "large" dams - a classification that includes dams higher than 15 metres, or smaller ones that impound large volumes of water.
That wouldn't be such a problem if provinces published their own comparable inventories.
Some (such as Quebec and Alberta) do, but there are considerable gaps. Ontario's inventory, for example, provides little more than names and locations of dams.
This is just one indication of how little attention some Canadian regulators pay. According to a report released in August by the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation at the University of Waterloo, most provinces and territories don't require owners to conduct flood risk assessments for their dams. Without them, it's difficult to identify decrepit dams whose failure would seriously threaten people and property.
"This may pose a potential threat to the safety of Canadians," the report noted, "as it may lead to outdated or inaccurate dam safety information."
Not all provinces are blind. Alberta and British Columbia, for example, classify dams based on the hazard they present. That information is crucial if regulators want to prioritize where to focus their attention. It also helps emergency responders; for example, it could help prioritize where to issue evacuation orders during a major flood or earthquake.
Apart from the 400 dams it owns, Ontario says it doesn't keep information on hazard potential classifications for dams within its borders.
"There's no legislation that requires dam owners, large or small, to do the engineering analysis to determine what happens if these dams fail," said Jeff Graham, president of GSS Engineering Consultants Ltd. in Owen Sound, Ont.
Ontario also lacks a system for verifying whether dams are properly maintained. British Columbia, in contrast, audits high and extreme consequence dams at least once every five years for compliance with provincial regulations; significant consequence dams are revisited every decade.
B.C. employs dam safety officers who perform this work.
B.C. also requires dam owners to report annually on the status of their dam safety programs.
Nothing like that exists in Ontario. B.C. publishes annual reports about its enforcement activities, which include audits to ensure dam owners comply with regulations. (Through these audits, the B.C. government has learned that "many dam owners are not following through with the work indicated on their report.") Ontario doesn't.
Ontario doesn't even know how often dams fail within its borders because it doesn't maintain records or data. Contrast that with Stanford University, which maintains a database of dam failures for the entire United States.
Dams do fail in Canada, regardless of whether anyone is keeping track. Last year, water overtopped the Glen Miller hydropower plant near Quinte West, Ont., following a power outage that caused the dam's doors to close. Downstream, a road collapsed and a home was flooded. Worse still was the failure of a dike in Sainte-Marthesur-le-Lac near Montreal, which flooded dozens of residential streets and forced around 6,500 people to evacuate.
Dianne Saxe, Ontario's former environment commissioner, doesn't mince words. "The clear impression I was given was that the Ministry of Natural Resources was not paying attention."
COLLISION COURSE Such inattention could become a bigger problem if, as many climatologists expect, Canada is condemned to more frequent and devastating floods.
According to a paper published this year by Megan C.
Kirchmeier-Young and Xuebin Zhang, researchers with Environment and Climate Change Canada's climate research division, extreme precipitation is already on a clear upward trend in North America, one that will likely continue. As the earth's climate continues to warm, it evaporates more water into the atmosphere.
This can produce heavier downpours, leading to flash floods.
"There is lots and lots of data around the world showing that the intensity of storms is increasing," said Ms. Saxe. "Which is exactly what you'd expect from the basic physics." Continuing loss of wetlands and other natural buffers exacerbates flooding in some areas.
Paradoxically, climate change may also lead to more and longer droughts. And that's not good news for dams, either: Under such conditions, earthen dams and levees may crack due to drying, subsidence and erosion.
Properly maintained and upgraded, even an aging dam may continue to operate safely and reliably. Consider Ontario Power Generation's fleet of 241 dams.
According to Tony Bennett, OPG's director of dam safety, the utility inspects many dam components - such as spillway gates and the hoists that lift stop logs - annually. Fences, safety booms and buoys are regularly maintained to keep people out of harm's way. And OPG also needs to keep its emergency plans current for all 24 river systems on which it operates.
That OPG goes to all this bother is hardly surprising: Its dams produced more than 32 terawatt hours of electricity last year.
Similarly, owners of flood-control structures have strong incentives to keep their dams in good working order.
But it's a different story with so-called "deadbeat dams" - those that have outlived their usefulness. These include dams built for log driving or to provide mechanical power for mills.
Some are owned by municipalities, mining companies and private owners who may lack adequate resources, and may not even know about emerging problems because they're not inspecting.
And that's to say nothing of "orphan dams" - ones that effectively have no owner at all. If they are in remote areas, the very existence of some earthen dams has been forgotten, and they may be so overgrown with vegetation as to have become unrecognizable.
"The great majority of dams really have no active maintenance," said Mr. Graham, "so they just slowly deteriorate."
The Gorrie Dam is a prime example. The nearby Maitland Mill's windows are either shuttered or broken, its clapboard weathered and disintegrating, its cogs rusted and motionless. Built in the 1850s, its equipment was once powered by water diverted by the dam into the sluiceway, which is now clogged with algae.
(The current dam dates from 1929.)
The mill closed in 1962. That's when the Maitland Valley Conservation Authority bought the dam. General manager Phil Beard said that at the time, the provincial government provided funding to its conservation authorities to buy up such properties to establish parks, campgrounds and other amenities.
Since then the dam's sole purpose has been to create a small pond for recreational purposes in the warmer months.
But owing to subsequent budget cuts, particularly during the 1990s, Mr. Beard said conservation authorities lack the funding to conduct major maintenance.
"Everything has a lifespan," he said. "And these structures weren't designed to deal with the impacts of a changing climate. So it's a double whammy."
Just kilometres downstream of the Gorrie Dam, in the Township of North Huron, anglers hop a chain-link fence to hang their fishing rods. They do so against all advice: The structure they're standing on, the Howson Dam, makes its failed upstream cousin appear robust by comparison.
Its piers are etched with webs of deep cracks that the rude slogans and genitalia spray-painted on them can't conceal. Originally designed to do double duty as a bridge, it's been closed to traffic for two decades. As early as the 1980s, evaluations determined that the concrete was in poor condition; another, in 2018, found that the concrete from three vertical core holes was "extensively deteriorated with fractures present throughout."
A document produced by the Township of North Huron warned that the Howson Dam "represents a liability to the municipality" and "has degenerated to the point that it can no longer be ignored."
Only recently, however, did the municipality become aware of what would be at stake if it failed. The first-ever safety review, in 2018, recommended that its hazard potential classification be listed as high because "the dam is located in a populated area susceptible to flooding during large floods." The Maitland Valley Conservation Authority has warned the town that it's "a bottleneck in the floodplain" that could flood the area immediately upstream.
"A lot of these old dams are really precarious," Mr. Graham said. "There's a good chance that these dams will fail in the next 50 years or so, due to really big flood events that will likely occur as a result of climate change, or maybe just bad luck."
BREACH OF KNOWLEDGE The Testalinden Dam was a privately owned earthen dam in B.C. Completed in 1937 for irrigation, it failed in June, 2010, releasing torrents of mud and debris that damaged a handful of homes and farms downstream.
An independent review conducted soon afterward found that beginning as early as the 1960s, inspections had revealed a series of deficiencies. One inspector wrote in 1977 that "the dam is in deplorable condition" and needed to be breached or rebuilt.
Another report, a decade later, made nearly identical observations.
But while B.C.'s dam safety program was able to detect poor maintenance, it failed to compel improvements. "There is no indication that the needed repairs were acted upon," the 2010 review concluded, "but also no indication that the owner was being held accountable to make those repairs."
Nor did the government warn the public. B.C.'s Information and Privacy Commissioner found in a 2013 report that while the government knew the dam was near the end of its life, it failed "to disclose information about the compromised state of the dam to residents downstream."
But here's the rub: B.C. was one of only four provinces that even had a dam safety program.
Other provinces, like Ontario, are likely oblivious to such dams because they don't require dam safety reviews except in rare circumstances, and often don't possess or study them when they are produced.
Despite reforms introduced following the Testalinden Dam failure, some owners in B.C. continue to flout their obligations.
According to audits conducted by B.C. dam safety officers, "many dam owners are not following through with the work indicated on their report."
Take the Frank Lake Dam, located near the Canada-U.S. border. In 2018, provincial officials reported that the "unauthorized" dam "was exhibiting signs of instability on the upstream slope" and was holding back about 130,000 cubic metres of water. The government ordered that it be decommissioned by September, 2019.
According to a government spokesperson, the dam's owner - Elkink Ranch Ltd. - has not complied. Elkink Ranch, the government noted, "formerly owned the Testalinden dam."
A SIMPLE BUT UNPOPULAR SOLUTION The good news is that there is a relatively straightforward remedy for the hazard presented by deadbeat dams: remove them.
It's the solution favoured by a growing number of small nongovernmental organizations.
They're often motivated more by hopes of restoring river ecosystems rather than improving public safety. The Ontario Rivers Alliance, a non-profit organization that focuses on restoring freshwater ecosystems, has begun approaching owners who might be interested in removal. "We're exploring ways of finding more of these old and dysfunctional dams," said its chair, Linda Heron.
Robert Huber, president of the Thames River Anglers Association in London, Ont., is also eager to encourage more decommissionings. He says he was inspired by large-scale decommissionings of hydroelectric projects on major U.S. river systems.
"They've been even knocking them down in the States left, right and centre, and doing a really good job of it," he said. "We looked at that and we're like, we could do that here... We're gonna keep trying to tear them out every chance we get."
Financially, removing a deadbeat dam is often the cheapest option. For the cash-strapped Maitland Valley Conservation Authority, the calculation for the Gorrie Dam was fairly straightforward. An engineer's study estimated removal would cost nearly $1-million. Replacing it, on the other hand, could cost as much as $3.5-million. (The Conservation Authority believes the decommissioning cost will be far lower than the initial estimate.)
Informed by that experience, in 2018 the Conservation Authority adopted a new policy for endof-life dams: It will offer to transfer ownership to the municipalities in which they're located for replacement. Failing that, the Conservation Authority will decommission them.
The Township of North Huron, which hasn't decided yet what to do with the Howson Dam, faces similar math. By one estimate, removal would cost $436,000, versus between $2.8million and $6.2-million to fix or rebuild.
Nevertheless, decommissioning is often a tough sell. While doing nothing may court significant legal liability in the event of subsequent failure, it is even cheaper (at least in the short term) than removal. And outside sources of funding are typically few. Ontario's Conservation Authorities, for example, can call on the province's Water Erosion Control Infrastructure program to fund removals, but at $5-million a year it is small and consistently oversubscribed.
To remedy this and encourage more removals, some have suggested government-funded schemes resembling recent efforts to remediate abandoned oil wells in Western Canada. To encourage removals, the Ontario Rivers Alliance offers to help owners raise money.
Even the most deadbeat of dams often has local defenders, who form "save the dam" groups to lobby local officials for rehabilitation. "Most people don't want to lose their reservoirs or local ponds that have been created with these dams," said Ms. Heron. "Sometimes we're successful, most times we're not."
There are also regulatory obstacles. A curious aspect of Ontario's Lakes and Rivers Improvement Act is that owners require provincial permits to repair or remove their dams, whereas there are few requirements for owners who choose to do nothing.
"The fascinating thing is, it's harder to go through the process of removing it than it was to put it in there in the first place," said Mr. Huber.
Since establishing his own engineering firm in 2013, Mr. Graham has helped several municipalities and conservation authorities remove small and medium-sized dams in Ontario. Last year GSS Engineering removed the Truax Dam on the Saugeen River in Walkerton, Ont. But he said the pace of removals in Canada is "glacial," and far slower than that south of the border.
"If we only are able to achieve the removal of one or two or three or four of these dams per year in Ontario, we'll never make a big dent in the total number," said Mr. Graham. "I mean, we're just scratching the surface."

Load-Date: October 13, 2020


End of Document




On the move in a warming world; Climate change is causing increasing hardships in hardscrabble regions such as Africa's Sahel, leaving many no choice but to migrate to stay alive. This leaves aid agencies with a quandary: should they deliver emergency aid, make long-term investments or help people move out of uninhabitable areas? Geoffrey York reports from Mao, Chad, on the emergence of the climate-change migrants
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 18, 2010 Saturday


Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS; RISE OF THE ECOREFUGEES; Pg. F6
Length: 3427 words
Byline: GEOFFREY YORK
Body


 Five-year-old Fatime moves in slow motion, barely able to lift her skeletal arms and legs. Flies land on her face, and she is too weak to brush them away. She struggles to drink a cup of therapeutic milk, the only food she can swallow. 
 Her parents were nomads who owned dozens of camels that provided meat and milk for their family. Then the rains stopped coming. The thorn trees began dying, the vegetation withered up and the big herds of camels ceased to roam. 
 "I've never seen this before," says her 29-year-old mother, Halime Djime, who has already lost two of her four children to malnutrition and disease. "Even when there were no trees, there would be vegetation. This is the first time that the land is all white." 
 Fatime weighs just seven kilograms - barely half of what she should weigh at her age. Teetering between life and death, her emaciated body evokes memories of Ethiopian famines in the 1980s. Yet she is not a poster child for a celebrity benefit concert or a charity campaign. Ignored by much of the world, the starving children of the African Sahel represent a new global challenge: How to respond to the climate crisis that the world's politicians have failed to fix, and how to break the cycle of endless emergency aid in an era of donor fatigue. 
 Fatime's father has been on the move for years, selling his few remaining camels and seeking work in Libya and eastern Chad. His wife does not even know where he is any more. These are the days of the "climate refugees" - families splitting apart as migrants flee from increasingly harsh conditions where survival is nearly impossible. 
 As the desert relentlessly expands and rainfall disappears, the villages in this part of the Sahel are almost empty of men. Most have trekked to Libya or Nigeria in search of jobs. Of the people who remain, 80 per cent are women and children. 
 Across the Sahel, a band of semi-arid land south of the Sahara stretching from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea, an estimated 10 million people suffered food shortages this year, including 850,000 children who are acutely malnourished and could die without urgent care. In the Sahel region of Chad, more than 20 per cent of children are acutely malnourished, on top of a chronic malnutrition rate of about 50 per cent. In some regions, mothers are desperately digging into anthills in search of tiny grains and seeds for their children. And this is just one of many places around the world where the changing climate has left the people dependent on foreign aid. 
 When the 190-nation climate conference in Cancun, Mexico, staggered to an end last weekend, there was no binding agreement on curbing carbon emissions and no sign of a treaty to replace the soon-expiring Kyoto Protocol. The negotiators will try again next December. But regardless of those negotiations, the facts on the ground will not change: The climate is growing more precarious, and millions of people are on the move. The question now is whether to encourage them to migrate - or to salvage their ravaged land with long-term investment, instead of simply handing out aid. 
 Unable to agree on a climate treaty, the wealthy nations at Cancun promised to help the poorer countries "adapt" to climate change. The people of the Sahel, however, have already been adapting for years - mostly by voting with their feet, abandoning their barren fields and migrating hundreds of kilometres in search of work. 
 "Anyone who could afford to leave has left," says 71-year-old Adji Goukouni, deputy chief of the village of Mampel, a collection of beehive huts and stick fences in the sandy wastes of the Sahel. 
 "I am too old to move," he says. "I have no strength left to work. If I have to die, I will die here." 
 For more than a decade now, he has been bewildered by the changing weather patterns. Fifteen years ago, he had more than 30 cows, 10 donkeys, five camels and five horses. Then they began dying. Within the past three years, his last remaining livestock perished. 
 "The rainfall has been diminishing all the time," he says. "The wind is stronger than before, and animals are fleeing. We have nothing left - we only have goats. All the animals are gone, and the wild animals too, even the geckos and hyenas and guinea fowl." 
 This year, the village suffered a perverse twist of fate. When everyone had given up on the rains, suddenly there were torrential storms, more rainfall than the village had seen in many years. But the farmers gained nothing. They had not gambled on the cost of seeding their fields. "We weren't expecting any rain, so I didn't plant anything," Mr. Goukouni said. 
 In the region around his village, farmers need 400 millimetres of rain annually to produce a crop. Over the past four years, rainfall has varied from 135 millimetres to 358 millimetres - not enough to sustain a harvest. And much of the rainfall is produced in torrential storms that cause more damage than benefit. 
 In the nearby town of Mao, the strange combination of drought and sudden torrential rain has had an unexpected result: huge fast-growing ravines that threaten to swallow up the town. This year alone, 350 houses were destroyed by the eroding sand, which also threatens to destroy a local school and the local airport. Sandbags and concrete walls have failed to hold back the rapid growth of the ravines. 
 A couple of hundred kilometres to the south, fishermen and farmers have been devastated by the dramatic disappearance of Lake Chad, one of the biggest lakes in Africa. The lake, shared by four countries, has lost 95 per cent of its size since the 1960s, partly because of climate change and partly because of overuse for agricultural irrigation. Experts say it could completely disappear within the next two decades. 
 Where once the lake had 150 species of fish, only about a dozen species are still alive today. The fish catch has dropped by 60 per cent, and thousands of fishermen have been forced to abandon the lake. From an airplane overhead, the lake is now revealed as a vast collection of shallow inlets and fingers of water, choked with weeds. It's an environmental catastrophe that imperils the 30 million people who depend on the lake, yet it has been virtually ignored by the world. 
 "When the water was deep, I could just throw out a net and it would fill with fish," says Paul Mbayou, who has been fishing on the lake for 17 years. "I used to get enough to sell in Nigeria. But now the fish are too small." 
 He takes a boat to check the traditional basket nets that he left in the weeds at the edge of the lake. But most of the nets are empty, and only one has a few tiny fish in it. "Nothing, nothing," he mutters as he checks each net. 
 The region around Lake Chad was once the breadbasket of the Sahel, but its farmers have seen their crops decline by 40 to 60 per cent in the past decade, as irrigation canals are left dry by the receding lake. Thousands of cattle have died, and the surviving cows are producing less than half as much milk. Even in this former breadbasket region, more than a fifth of the children are acutely malnourished. 
 The village of Ngambia was built in the 1940s on an island in Lake Chad. Then the lake receded, the village was left stranded in the middle of the desert, and the villagers had to stop fishing. They tried to grow crops, but they could produce only enough to feed their families for a few months of the year. So now the men have moved away in search of work, leaving the women and children behind. 
 The biggest town on the Chad side of the lake, Bol, has lost more than half of its population since the 1990s. Its mayor, Ahmat Tidjani Boukar, says the men have journeyed to Nigeria or Libya to become labourers or security guards, or have joined the Chadian army. Many of the women, he says, have become prostitutes or beggars. 
 "The community has always depended on the lake, but now there are no fish," the mayor says. "In the past, we exported fish everywhere. Now, we can't even produce enough for ourselves. It's very likely that people will just keep moving away." 
 Evidence like this is convincing some experts that the Sahel is becoming uninhabitable. Across most of Africa, average temperatures have been steadily rising for decades, while rainfall has been declining. The Sahel is one of the worst-hit regions. Climate change and human exploitation have left it vulnerable to extreme weather and a destructive cycle of drought and floods. 
 For more than a decade, child malnutrition in the Sahel region of Chad has been above the emergency threshold (defined by the United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) as a 15-per-cent rate of acute malnutrition). The Sahel countries, including Chad and Niger, are among the poorest and hungriest in world, with nearly one-quarter of their children dying before their fifth birthday. An estimated 225,000 children die annually of malnutrition in five Sahel countries: Chad, Niger, Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. 
 "Before, we had crises, but they came and went," says Maina Abakar, a nutrition expert in Chad. "Now, the crisis just stays." 
 The changing climate has created a dilemma for wealthy donor countries such as Canada. Instead of spending millions of dollars on emergency food for the region's malnourished children, should they be encouraging the people to leave? When the Cancun conference promised $100-billion annually to poor countries to help them adapt to climate change, does it mean helping Africa ship its people out of uninhabitable areas? 
 "If the conditions in the Sahel continue to worsen because of climatic deterioration, it's obvious that it can't sustain a large number of people," says Jean-Luc Siblot, director of the Chad operations of the World Food Program, the UN food agency. 
 The WFP is providing supplementary food rations to about 60,000 children and 81,000 pregnant women and young mothers in Chad alone. It has asked for $300-million from donors to support the Sahel countries this year. But Mr. Siblot questions whether this kind of assistance is the best solution for the region in the long term. 
 "When it is likely that the climate will worsen over the next 20 to 30 years, I'm not sure whether we'll be able to sustain it," he says in his office in Chad's capital, N'Djamena. 
 "The desert is expanding every year. You can't have a big percentage of the population living in those conditions. They're migrating away, in a very disorganized way. I don't see a solution for it. You can dump as much food as you want into the Sahel, but it won't solve the problem." 
 Unicef sees it differently. In its view, its primary obligation is to prevent starvation and save the lives of the families in the Sahel, even if this encourages them to remain in a region where the climate is deteriorating and the desert is spreading. 
 "This is where our parents and ancestors were born," says Yakoura Maloum, a Unicef officer who was born in the town of Bol. "The tombs of our sultans are here. It's not possible for us to move away. Individuals can move, but the community cannot move." 
 In the Sahel region of Chad alone, Unicef is providing food for 50,000 malnourished children in about 200 emergency feeding centres. Last year, it supported 12,000 children, so the number has quadrupled this year as the crisis deepened. 
 "I've never seen a situation as bad as this," says John Ntambi, a Unicef nutrition specialist in the Mao district. 
 "You see thousands of children all the time, and it never ends. It never gets any better. The population is less and less capable of feeding itself, so it's more reliant on external support. The levels of malnutrition are very alarming." 
 Even after the feeding centres were created this year, it can be a long ordeal for mothers to reach one. Distances are vast, and roads almost non-existent. When her child fell ill, it took five days for Halime Djime to travel 700 kilometres to the hospital in Mao. 
 The irony is that the Sahel countries could do more to feed themselves, but they are hamstrung by poor land policies, low education levels, a lack of money for investment, and autocratic regimes that spend more money on weapons than on children. If donor countries refused to help the malnourished children of the Sahel, the children would simply starve. 
 "I've never worked in a region where the government is so unresponsive," Mr. Ntambi says. "All of the life-saving supplies are being provided by Unicef, and nothing is being provided by the government. The priorities are wrong." 
 Many experts believe that the Sahel has huge potential to sustain crops and livestock if its water resources were managed properly. Scattered among the sand dunes and scrub land, there are thousands of oases and valleys where crops can grow. But less than 10 per cent of the population has access to these oases, which are owned by a privileged few. And since the water is deep underground, the owners often lack the money to dig wells and pump out the water for crops. 
 In the region surrounding Mao in the Sahel of western Chad, 750 oases are underused because their owners cannot afford to dig wells, according to the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization. It estimates that only 10 per cent of the oases are properly developed for agricultural use. 
 Another key factor is the government's preference for military spending. Chad has received billions of dollars in oil revenue in recent years (it is the sixth-biggest African supplier of oil to the United States), yet most of this revenue is spent on its security forces, despite its earlier promises to spend the oil money on poverty alleviation. 
 "People think Chad is a rich country because of its oil - and it's true," says Jean-Baptiste Ndikumana, the Unicef deputy representative in Chad. "If they used this money for social services, there could be some improvement. Instead, they use it for weapons." 
 Poor levels of education are another crucial problem. Knowing little about nutrition, many people in the Sahel turn to traditional healers when their children are starving. The "healers" usually do more harm than good: They cut incisions in children's mouths or burn their bottoms to "treat" diarrhea. 
 Grandmothers, meanwhile, encourage their pregnant daughters to eat less food so that their babies will be smaller; or they advise mothers to give water, instead of milk, to newborns. Both are dangerous practices. Breastfeeding is one of the best ways to improve a child's health, yet only about 3 per cent of Chad's children are exclusively breastfed in their first six months. And because of cultural traditions, women with starving children are reluctant to travel to a feeding centre without the permission of their husbands, who are often unreachable because they have migrated in search of work. 
 Education and agricultural development are the keys to saving the people of the Sahel from climate change. Yet only a small handful of international agencies are present here, in contrast to the hundreds of agencies in Haiti or Afghanistan. 
 There are no dramatic earthquakes or civil wars to draw attention to the Sahel - only the slow grind of climate change, wreaking its gradual chaos on the land. Relief agencies tend to respond late, or not at all. The UN was aware of the drought in Chad in the fall of 2009, yet it did not send emergency aid until the spring of this year. "We came too late," Mr. Siblot admits. "We wasted three months, scratching our heads and trying to decide on a response." 
 The FAO is one of the UN agencies that should be helping Chad to improve its agricultural productivity, yet it has only a small presence here. In effect, the UN and the world's donor countries have channelled their funds to emergency aid, rather than long-term agricultural development - which means that Chad will always be dependent on aid. "We are saving lives, but we are not solving the problems," says Mr. Ndikumana of Unicef. 
 The Sahel may symbolize the future of foreign aid: responding to climate-related crises that leave millions at risk of hunger and death. The solution, as Mr. Siblot acknowledges, is to do more than "dumping food" into a region. There needs to be much heavier investment in education and agriculture, so that massive numbers of people aren't forced to abandon their homes. And if a regime prefers to spend its billions on soldiers and military weaponry, the buyers of its oil might have to use their influence to press for new priorities. Otherwise, the vast human migration in places such as the Sahel will spin out of control forever. 
Geoffrey York is The Globe and Mail's Africa bureau chief.
 *********** 
 A GLOBAL LOOK AT ECOREFUGEES 
 PAKISTAN 
 The torrential rains that began in July of this year, during monsoon season, caused massive flooding, submerging one-fifth of the country's land mass and forcing large-scale population movement. According to the United Nations, the flooding caused the greatest humanitarian crisis in recent history, affecting more people than the 2004 Asian tsunami and the recent earthquakes in Kashmir and Haiti combined. More than 1,600 people were killed. The UN estimates that more than 21 million people were injured or made homeless by the flooding. "Climate change with all its severity and unpredictability has become a reality for 170 million Pakistanis," Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi told the United Nations General Assembly in August. "The present situation in Pakistan reconfirms our extreme vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change." 
 THE ARCTIC 
 The 600 inhabitants of Shishmaref, a village located on a small island off the northwest coast of Alaska, voted in 2002 to relocate their community because the combination of a rising sea level, disappearing sea ice and increasingly fierce storms has contributed to rapid erosion of the land mass they live on. Temperatures in Alaska have increased by as much as 4.4 degrees Celsius over the past 30 years, causing glaciers to melt and sea levels to rise. The sea ice that protects Shishmaref from storm surges has started to melt and the permafrost under the village has begun to thaw, making the land even more vulnerable to erosion. The shoreline is moving inland at a rate of about three metres a year, and homes have begun falling into the sea. The details of the relocation have yet to be finalized. 
 BANGLADESH 
 In 1995, half of Bhola Island, the largest island in Bangladesh, became permanently flooded because of rising sea levels, leaving 500,000 people homeless. The Bhola Islanders have been described as some of the world's first climate-change refugees. Throughout low-lying Bangladesh, 12 million to 17 million people have fled their homes in recent decades because of environmental disasters. Many of these refugees are moving to the swelling slums of Dhaka. The country's 150 million inhabitants live in the delta of three waterways, and most of the country sits less than seven metres above sea level. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, rising sea levels will wipe out more cultivated land in Bangladesh than anywhere else in the world in the coming years. 
 CARTERET ISLANDS 
 Rising sea levels have driven the Carteret Islanders of Papua New Guinea from their homes, making their community the first in the world to be relocated because of climate change. The 2,500 residents were forced to move to nearby Bougainville as the rising waves threatened to overtake their homes and crops. For more than 20 years, the islanders built sea walls and planted mangroves to fight against the rising sea levels. However, storm surges and high tides began washing away homes, destroying gardens and contaminating drinking water. In 2005, the Papua New Guinean government authorized the evacuation of the islands, which are expected to be completely submerged by 2015. Several other island nations are considering following the lead of the Carteret Islands. "Tuvalu, Maldives, Kiribati, Vanuatu are looking for ways to evacuate their entire population because of saltwater intrusion and rising sea levels," Christiana Figueres, the executive secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, said at last week's climate-change meeting in Cancun. "Sooner rather than later, island nations will have to seek refuge in other, higher-lying countries." Tuvalu has already moved 3,000 of its inhabitants to New Zealand. 
 Sources: The Daily Telegraph, AOL News, The Globe and Mail, The Guardian, BBC, Scientific American, 
 The Washington Post 
 With research from Rick Cash. 

Load-Date: December 18, 2010


End of Document




Engineering infrastructure to tackle climate change; Action plans aim to gird cities against extreme weather
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 30, 2019 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B7
Length: 980 words
Byline: DAVID ISRAELSON, Special to The Globe and Mail
Body


Hans Arisz's job as an engineer working in Saint John - inspecting and assessing urban infrastructure - has just become bigger. He's looking at how the city will respond to and manage the effects of climate change.
Increasingly, urban communities across Canada are seeing the big picture, hiring consultants and adopting plans to determine the changes needed to cope with the long-term problem of climate change worldwide.
"In Saint John, we're helping the city with its climate-change action plan," says Mr. Arisz, a civil engineer and principal at Fredericton-based engineering firm R.V. Anderson and Associates Ltd. "We do a risk rating for all of the city's infrastructure, and then we look at it a second time, considering the changing loads from climate [factors]."
Addressing potential wear and tear due to climate change used to be an afterthought for engineering firms; now it's a key item on their checklists for urban projects. Whether it's a large city such as Toronto or Vancouver, or a smaller one such as Saint John, engineers are currently focusing on how bridges, tunnels, pipes, wires and walls fare in a world where extreme weather and temperatures are becoming the norm.
"Of all three levels of government, municipalities are the most active when it comes to [addressing] climate change," says Eddie Oldfield, Fredericton-based senior lead of project and advisory services for QUEST, a national not-for-profit organization established in 2007. QUEST (Quality Urban Energy Systems of Tomorrow) engages directly with governments, utility companies and the private sector on climate change and clean energyrelated improvements.
"Communities can work to become more resilient, adapting to climate change while at the same time reducing the greenhouse gases they emit," Mr. Oldfield says.
QUEST's reach extends to more than 200 communities of all sizes across Canada to help them become smart cities with energy systems, buildings, housing and transportation networks that can meet the 21st-century demands posed by weather swings and severe storms, as well as the influx of people into urban areas and gridlock.
Adjusting to a warmer, wetter, windier world is mandatory for all communities, no matter their size. Earth's oceans are heating up, contributing to cyclones and floods, and putting at risk hundreds of millions of people living in coastal cities, including those in Canada, such as Saint John.
This dire warning was issued in the recently released UN-backed Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, prepared by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Mr. Arisz says virtually every engineering task that involves infrastructure needs to be evaluated relative to climate change. "In Saint John, there may be a culvert that's in good shape and, right now, has a low risk rating. But if you add the fact that climate change gives us bigger, more frequent storms, it might not have the capacity it needs, so the risk may now be unacceptable."
Seeking solutions to persistent annual flooding compelled Saint John City Council to approve a climate-change action plan this past May. It came just days after the Saint John River flooded, forcing people from their homes and triggering disaster relief - just as it had done in 2018.
"We engaged R.V. Anderson to help bring in our program to help us with a road map [for] the next two or three years," says Samir Yammine, Saint John's manager of asset and energy management.
The project will cost nearly $27million, he says, with the federal government contributing about 40 per cent this year.
Planning for floods, wildfires, hurricanes and tornadoes used to fall into the category of emergency response, but cities across Canada now consider climate-change action its own high-priority category. Cities pose the biggest problems, yet paradoxically, because they cause most of these problems, they also hold the potential to provide the biggest solutions.
The UN Climate Action Summit, held on September 23 in New York, revealed that more than half of the world's population reside in urban areas and that cities are responsible for about 70 per cent of energy-related greenhouse gases worldwide.
While all major communities in Canada have climate-change action plans or are preparing them, the pace and extent vary.
Toronto approved its TransformTO plan in 2017, and the process to update it, which spans 2021-23, begins in October, 2019, with a call for public input. TransformTO calls for the city to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 levels - by 30 per cent by 2020, 65 per cent by 2030 and 80 per cent by 2050.
"Achieving these targets will require transformational changes in how we live, work, build and commute," says the City of Toronto website's TransformTO section. That's quite a challenge when Ontario and other provinces are fighting Ottawa in court over even a modest carbon tax.
City governments are aware that the pressure is on from national and international watchdogs, as well as vocal activists such as 16-year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg.
Indeed, Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver belong to the Londonbased C40 network of megacities committed to addressing climate change.
In sync with the 2019 C40 World Mayors Summit, to be held in Copenhagen, Mayor John Tory in Toronto issued a climateemergency declaration, which would help his city's lawmakers focus on the need for more urgent measures. As part of the rapidly growing effort to protect communities against expected climate change - requiring preparedness at multilevels - Mr. Arisz uses engineering analysis tools to focus on the biggest impacts to infrastructure.
"In New Brunswick's case, it's flooding. In both 2018 and 2019 Saint John saw some of the biggest floods it has ever seen," he says. "So that's what we focus on.
Wherever we work now, everything we do is done through a climate change lens."

Load-Date: September 30, 2019


End of Document




Weather whiplash paradox pains climate scientists; Temperature extremes often used by climate change deniers to sow doubt about science
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
February 2, 2019 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 720 words
Byline: IVAN SEMENIUK, Staff
Body


Get ready for weather whiplash.
Many cities in the United States that felt the record-breaking bite of Arctic winter, and parts of Canada around the Great Lakes, will enjoy daytime temperatures well above the freezing point this weekend.
That extraordinary swing will leave out much of the Canadian Prairies next week, where daytime highs may not climb above -20 C. But for those on the undulating border between warm and cold air masses, the rapid change may prompt some to wonder whether this is what scientists mean when they say climate change will bring more weather extremes. And perhaps whether this the new normal.
The question has been recurring since the winter of 2013-2014 when a record cold wave ushered the term "polar vortex" into the common vernacular. The following year produced a similar pattern. This week's news coverage largely echoes reports written then. The suggestion - and sometimes the assertion by reporters - is that the severe cold is a manifestation of global warming.
That apparent paradox is one that climate change deniers seize on to sow doubt about science.
This week U.S. President Donald Trump quipped on Twitter that he wished global warming would come back.
So to be crystal clear, atmospheric scientists are not debating about whether climate change is happening. The evidence for climate change is overwhelming, and we should expect the planet to warm owing to the continuing release of heat-trapping greenhouse gases.
"The underlying slow change in climate that's driven by human activity is still there," said Gregory Flato, a federal climate scientist and manager at the Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis in Victoria. "The theory is not undermined by a cold winter."
Nevertheless, when deep cold snaps take hold at middle latitudes, scientists are divided about what exactly is going on, because it's tricky separating what may be normal variation from the extra kick that climate change is applying to the whole system.
The best indication of a climate change connection to severe cold in North America comes directly from observations. Residents of the U.S. Midwest and the Great Lakes region may have noticed that, including this past week, three of the past six winters have featured memorable cold snaps, sometimes interspersed with abrupt swings to warmer weather.
But six years is not enough time to tease out a genuine climate trend, said Paul Kushner, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Toronto. For most scientists, 30 years is a more typical minimum. Dr. Kushner said that some of his own lab's research has failed to show a clear indication that cold snaps are becoming more frequent. In any case, such results often depend on how the data are analyzed.
For the past several years, Jennifer Francis, a climate scientist at Rutgers University, has advanced a compelling argument that the accelerated warming of the Arctic relative to the mid-latitudes has resulted in a wavier than average jet stream. Rather than flowing straight across the continent eastto-west, this fast-moving current of air high above the surface now tends to meander like a river across a flat plain. The result is that cold air swirling around the North Pole (the polar vortex) is less confined and can produce eddies that drift southward, bringing High Arctic conditions to midlatitude cities.
Dr. Francis acknowledges the issue isn't settled.
One reason to harbour reservations is that computer models of the climate do not seem to reproduce the trend. That's not to say the models don't sometimes generate extreme cold. It's just that they don't show a clear link to climate change.
"If anything, they seem to suggest that a rapidly warming Arctic also leads to a warming of the mid-latitude continents," said Judah Cohen, a Boston-based climatologist with Atmospheric and Environmental Research, a consultancy that specializes in weather risk assessment.
He added that efforts are needed to improve consistency between models to help reduce ambiguity.
Meanwhile, Dr. Kushner said that non-scientists should bear in mind that the link between climate change and the increasing risk of heat waves in the summer is far clearer and potentially lethal for those who are vulnerable.
But can we expect more frequent and severe cold snaps in the future? For now, science says: "Maybe."

Load-Date: February 2, 2019


End of Document




THE SMARTEST GUYS ON THE PLANET; Governments, industry and the public can't seem to get serious about the reality of climate change. But the reinsurance business has - and it's already moved on to mastering the math on the other catastrophes our future holds
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 29, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS MAGAZINE; Pg. 66
Length: 4439 words
Byline: ERIC REGULY
Body


 The Bavarian city of Passau, about 200 kilometres east of Munich, has been called Germany's Venice. It floats like a battleship, with church towers as funnels, at the confluence of one mighty river, the Danube, and two lesser ones, the Inn and the Ilz. The city is famous for its baroque and Gothic architecture; its star attraction, St. Stephen's Cathedral, is home to Europe's biggest pipe organ.
 It is also famous for its floods. 
 They happen every few decades or so, turning public squares and narrow, cobblestone streets into canals. So the rains that began at the end of May seemed routine, certainly no equal to Passau's worst flood in memory, dating to 1954, when the Danube swelled to a depth of 12.2 metres.
 But the rains proved incessant and Passau's three rivers kept rising mercilessly. By the morning of Sunday, June 2, it was obvious that the city of 50,000 was in trouble; anyone with a street-level shop, restaurant or office scrambled back to the old town to do what they could to minimize the inevitable damage.
 Martin Kronawitter bolted to the Passau offices of Caritas, a Catholic aid agency, at 9 that morning. The agency is housed in a century-old, three-storey building that faces the Danube. When Kronawitter arrived, the water had already risen over the river embankment and had flowed into the parking lot and two-lane road that separates Caritas from the embankment. Wearing boots, Kronawitter sloshed his way to the front door. The 44-year-old caregiver's mission was to retrieve paperwork and the keys of the patients whom its staff treats in their homes. "On the Saturday, it was raining but everything looked as usual," he says. "But on Sunday morning, the river came up very, very fast." 
 Kronawitter shifted records from the lower to the upper floor. The water kept rising. By the early afternoon, the main floor was submerged and he realized that leaving by the front door would be suicidal. "So I hopped out the back window," he says. "We've never seen water so high." 
 Over the next few days, Passau was a crisis zone. Plying what used to be streets in their inflatable boats, soldiers rescued residents from upper floors. Drinking water and electricity were cut off. Debris floated everywhere and light poles were submerged. When the water receded, the streets were buried in mud. Wrecked furniture, yanked out of shops and offices, made the city look like a war zone. The Caritas building was inaccessible for five days. 
 The Danube peaked at 12.8 metres, making it worse than not just the 1954 inundation, but the worst flood since 1501.
 Passau was just one of many cities in Germany and Eastern Europe to get hit with record or near-record flooding that month. Munich Re, the German giant of reinsurance - the business of insuring the policies of insurers - put the damage from the June floods at (EURO)12 billion. It was estimated that insurance covered only about (EURO)3 billion of that amount, meaning a lot of people were out a lot of money. Munich Re's primary insurance arm, ERGO, alone paid (EURO)83 million in claims to German flood victims - twice as much as for the last big flood, which was in 2002. 
 Less than three weeks after the European inundation, Calgary and other parts of Alberta got hit with the worst floods in the province's history. About 100,000 people were displaced and five were killed. Damages were estimated to be as high as $6 billion (Canadian), of which $1.7 billion was insured, making it either Canada's costliest or second-costliest natural disaster - the final claims tally was still being calculated in the early autumn. The Alberta floods were brutally expensive for homeowners because "overland" flood insurance is not available in Canada, though some relief came from the federal government's Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements. 
 In September, three months after the German floods, the Caritas building in Passau, which is owned by the Catholic church, was still a wreck, the ground floor and walls all but destroyed. "They want to tear down the building," Kronawitter says. "The damage is greater than the value of the building."
 In the aftermath of the German and Canadian floods, the victims, the insurers, the media, the politicians and the scientists were all asking the same questions: What caused them? Was it the relentless buildup of atmospheric carbon dioxide? Could "extreme" weather events become the new normal or were they once-a-millennium acts of god?
 In Munich Re's offices, there wasn't much debate as the claims cheques flew out the door: The higher frequency of extreme weather events is influenced by climate change; and recent climate change is largely due to burning hydrocarbons. "I'm quite convinced that most climate change is caused by human activity," says Peter Höppe, head of geo-risks research at Munich Re. 
 His statement is not remarkable,  even though the big American insurers don't like to put the words "climate change" and "anthropogenic" in  the same sentence. What is remarkable is that Munich Re first warned about global warming way back in 1973, when it noticed that flood damage was increasing. It was the first big company to do so - two decades before the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit triggered a planetary anxiety attack by publicizing the concepts of "global warming" and "climate change."
 Munich Re, Swiss Re and the other reinsurers, along with the Lloyd's of London insurance market (unrelated to the bank of the same name), stand out from the rest of the business world by being on the same page as scientists on climate change. What's more, while most of the planet has its head in the sand about the reality and requirements of global warming, the reinsurance industry has already moved on to mastering the math on other catastrophes. 
 Like any industry, the reinsurers and insurers stay in business by not losing money year after year. To accomplish that, they have to turn ever-greater portions of "unexpected" losses stemming from the weather into "expected" losses, which requires that they become adept at risk modelling. 
 Reinsurers and insurers lose money when they misjudge risks that come back to bite them. To reduce their own risk profiles, the insurers have to become expert at matching the premiums to the estimated risk. Charging too little for, say, flood risk in a region that is becoming flood-prone is bad business. Equally, charging too much for premiums on natural catastrophes that are not on the rise, like earthquakes, is bad business because it scares away potential insurance buyers.
 Just as recognizing the trend lines on climate change is good business for the reinsurers, the oil companies' skepticism was designed to prevent or dilute regulations that would hurt their business. The reinsurers had no such axe to grind. The question: Will they be right on emerging risks, such as genetically modified crops and Arctic shipwrecks? 
 Munich Re - Münchener Rückversicherungs-Gesellschaft AG, to use its proper name - is one of the world's biggest reinsurers. In 2012, it wrote (EURO)52 billion in insurance and reinsurance and earned (EURO)3.2 billion. It has 45,000 employees and a market value of (EURO)27 billion as of early November, putting it neck and neck with rival Swiss Re. There are no Canadian players of this scale in the business. The  American biggie, General Re, is privately held. Like Munich Re, it's an investment held by Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 
 Höppe, 59, is "Prof. Dr. Dr." on his business card - he has doctorates in both meteorology and human biology. His endless CV, which includes advisory positions at the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology and the OECD's advisory board on the "financial management of large-scale catastrophes," underlines his stature as one of the world's top climate-change specialists. His main areas of research have been the effects of atmospheric processes (heat, cold, ultraviolet radiation, air pressure) and pollutants (ozone, soot) on we poor humans. 
 Höppe is compact, intense and enthusiastic. A bit rumpled, like a scientist from Central Casting, he loves to back up his statements with official sources, jumping up every few minutes during an interview to retrieve documents. The 1973 document he prints out for me is a source of pride within the company, which bills itself as "the first alerter to global warming." The warning notes "the rising temperature of the Earth's atmosphere [as a result of which glaciers and the polar caps recede, surfaces of lakes are reduced and ocean temperatures rise]." It points to the "rise of the CO2 content of the air, causing a change in the absorption of solar energy."
 The warning ends with a pledge: "We wish to enlarge on this complex of problems in greater detail, especially as - as far as we know - its conceivable impact on the long-range risk trend has hardly been examined to date." 
 The pledge was fulfilled. Munich Re has been examining climate change since then, compiling the world's most extensive database on natural disasters, covering some 33,000 events and drawing on research by its own staff and more than 200 other sources. "There hasn't been any industry or company that has addressed climate change this early," Höppe says. 
 How did Munich Re and the other reinsurers get it right so early? The answer, in a word, is fear - fear of losses that could destroy their business. No industry has more incentive to know the effects of climate change than the reinsurance and insurance industries.
 Worldwide, the insurers pay weather-related claims of about $50 billion (U.S.) a year, a figure that has more than doubled every decade since the 1980s, adjusted for inflation. In 2012, the 10 costliest natural catastrophes, from Hurricane Sandy to floods in Pakistan, caused $131 billion (U.S.) in damages, of which about $56 billion (U.S.) was insured, Munich Re says.
 Canada fits the global trend. The Co-operators Group, an insurance co-operative with more than $34 billion of assets under administration, says the costs of natural disasters have doubled every five to seven years for the last 50 years. The Co-operators General Insurance Co. unit lost $5.9 million in the second quarter of this year thanks to being under water $77 million on policies affected by the Alberta floods. The figure would have been higher if it had not collected reinsurance from the big reinsurers. 
 If the reinsurers had not adjusted their premiums to reflect the greater frequency, intensity and cleanup costs of weather-related disasters, they probably would have declared bankruptcy years ago. But they have become so good at forecasting that, as a group, they manage to pump out profits even in years when claims go sky-high. In 2011, the costliest year ever for loss claims thanks to floods in Thailand and the earthquake that caused the Fukushima disaster, the 40 largest reinsurers made pretax profits of $5.4 billion (U.S.), according to Standard & Poor's. (Low interest rates also put pressure on reinsurers' profits, because their investment portfolios are weighted toward bonds.) 
 "They have been leaders on climate change for a long time," says Gordon McBean, co-director of the Centre for Environment and Sustainability at Western University and president-elect of the International Council for Science. "We should give them credit because they raised the awareness of climate change for governments." 
 As for said governments, it's not like they haven't had sufficient warning about climate change. 
 According to McBean, the first inkling of what would later become known as the "greenhouse effect" came in 1824, when a French mathematician, Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier, wrote a paper positing that the atmosphere blocks outgoing radiation from Earth and radiates a portion of it back. In the late 19th century, a Swedish Nobel laureate, Svante Arrhenius, developed the first theoretical model on how atmospheric CO2 affects our planet's temperatures. 
 In the late 1950s, the International Council of Scientific Unions (which now is known as the International Council for Science) initiated the first global measurements of atmospheric CO2 and stratospheric ozone. At the same time, a seminal paper from the Scripps Institute of Oceanography came out with a stark warning: "Human beings are now carrying out a large-scale geophysical experiment," said the report, which added that "we are returning to the atmosphere and oceans the concentrated organic carbon stored in sedimentary rock over hundreds of millions of years." 
 The 1960s saw the first computer modelling of the consequences of treating the atmosphere as a CO2 dump. The pioneer was the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In 1967, its scientists Suki Manabe and Richard Wetherald reached a stunning conclusion that still shapes climate change policy and debate: "A doubling of the CO2 content in the atmosphere has the effect of raising the temperature of the atmosphere [whose relative humidity is fixed] by about two degrees C." 
 It took about a decade for the scientific agenda to seep into the policy agenda. The first World Climate Conference was held in 1979, in Geneva, leading to the birth of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1988. The 1980s and 1990s saw a seemingly endless string of conferences whose reports built the case for anthropogenic climate change, while also inspiring an onslaught of skepticism from the oil and coal industries and climate-change deniers, whose ferocious foot-dragging continues largely unabated today.
 One of the key gatherings was held in 1988 in Canada, which hosted the Toronto Conference on the Changing Atmosphere: Implications for Global Security. Opened by then-prime ministers Brian Mulroney of Canada and Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway, the conference summary contained an attention-grabber: "Humanity is conducting an unintended, uncontrolled, globally pervasive experiment whose ultimate consequences could be second only to a global nuclear war."
 The IPCC reports have followed a similar, if somewhat less histrionic, trajectory. The second report, in 1995, meekly noted, "The balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate." The latest one, from September, concluded that it was "extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century."
 In other words, all those years of conferences still haven't taken the ball down the field from where Munich Re put it decades ago. 
 "It was just a gut feeling that things had changed," Höppe says, noting that insurance losses at the time were rising. "The weather extremes showed some strange patterns and we wanted to learn more about this. Was this a natural fluctuation or a long-term trend that we had to consider in our risk models?"
 In 1974, Munich Re recruited its first meteorologist. Over the years, it has hired a small army of natural scientists specializing in geology, geophysics, meteorology, hydrology and geography. The team now numbers 35 scientists. By the early 1990s, with more than a decade of data in its computers, Munich Re spotted unmistakable patterns and trends "that are only explainable by changes in the atmosphere due to the emissions of greenhouse gases," Höppe says.
 The reinsurers' anxiety levels went through the roof when, in early 2002, the Western Antarctic's Larsen B ice shelf, measuring more than 3,000 square kilometres, collapsed, disintegrating an estimated 500 billion tonnes of ice. While that particular area had always been one of global warming's "hot spots" - it had been warming by about 0.5 degrees Celsius every decade since the 1940s - the speed and size of the breakup alarmed scientists. "It was an extraordinary event," remembers Lord Julian Hunt, 72, who was director-general of Britain's Meteorological Office from 1992 to 1997 and now teaches climate modelling at University College London. "It broke away within one month. It had been stable for 12,000 years."
 While the Larsen B disintegration did not raise sea levels directly, since the shelf was already floating, Hunt says that if the massive Western Antarctic ice sheet slid into the sea, it would raise sea levels by two to three metres, inundating vast numbers of coastal cities. "The reinsurance industry is very concerned about rising sea levels," Hunt says. "The Western Antarctic ice sheet is what they really worry about, and it's moving." 
 During the database's early years, Munich Re's scientists did not know whether the changing climate was due to natural oscillations or human activity, though they certainly had their suspicions. That changed in the mid-1990s, when Höppe's predecessor, Gerhard Berz, who was the first head of geo-risk research at Munich Re, began talking openly about anthropogenic climate change. Höppe too is utterly convinced that humans are to blame, as are the vast majority of the world's climate scientists. Even some oil companies have come out of the closet to take the anthropogenic view. 
 The trend lines in Munich Re's charts are compelling. They show that the insured and uninsured losses from natural catastrophes have been on the upswing since work on the company's database began in earnest in 1980. Since 1995, there have been eight years when the total losses have exceeded $150 billion (U.S.) (in 2012 dollars) and four years when they exceeded $200 billion (U.S.). In record-setting 2011, the year of the Japanese earthquake and tsunami, the total shot above $400 billion (U.S.). Between 1980 and 1994, the annual losses were consistently below $150 billion (U.S.). 
 That said, anthropogenic climate change doesn't explain everything. Roger Pielke Jr., professor of environmental studies at the University of Colorado at Boulder, argues that there is no meaningful trend in insured losses from extreme weather events. "The accumulation of wealth in disaster-prone areas is and will always remain by far the most important driver of future economic disaster damage," he wrote in his blog, quoting a scientific paper. 
 Indeed, building in low-lying coastal and riverine areas is asking for trouble. More construction, more economic losses, end of story. (Lloyd's notes that more than three billion people live within 200 kilometres of a coastline, a number that is likely to double by 2025.) "In the last 20 years, losses have gone up, but GDP and population have gone up too," says Paul Kovacs, executive director for Western University's Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
 Munich Re does not dispute that losses increase as coastal areas get built up. But it does note that in the long run, the frequency of weather-related catastrophes rises in step with global warming, and is thus linked with CO2 concentrations - they hit 400 parts per million at a Hawaiian measuring station last spring, probably the highest level since the Pliocene Epoch, between 2.6 million and 5.3 million years ago.
 The number of meteorological events (storms, hurricanes), hydrological events (floods) and climatological events (extreme temperatures, drought, forest fires) has infrequently dipped under 600 per year since 1996, and has climbed above 800 five times since 2006. During most of the 1980s and 1990s, the frequency ranged from 200 to 600 events per year. Meanwhile, the number of non-weather disasters - earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions - has not spiked since 1980; in fact, the trend has inclined slightly downward since 2000. "This is why we now believe it to be anthropogenic global warming," Höppe says. "But actually, to be honest, it doesn't make any difference to our assumptions, or pricing, whether it's anthropogenic or natural." 
 Munich Re has no evidence to suggest the upward trend in weather-related disasters will reverse any time soon. For those in risky places, premiums will rise.
 Insurance companies don't worry about climate change alone. They also worry about getting the premiums right for future, or "emerging," risks. The asbestos debacle still haunts them. The industry totally misjudged the long-term risks of asbestosis, the lung disease caused by exposure to asbestos fibres, which continues to kill thousands each year. What they did not know was that asbestosis often appears decades after exposure to asbestos. Thousands of Lloyd's "names" - the individual investors who had underwritten asbestos-related policies - went bankrupt in the 1990s, almost destroying the world's premier insurance market. 
 The new beasts that the industry must reckon with would include the risks - from building collapses to epidemics - associated with the new breed of densely packed megacities, some of which are on track to have 20 million people (Karachi, for example) or almost 30 million (Delhi, Shanghai) by 2025. They would also include the risks of genetically modified foods, cyberattacks and shipping disasters, from the not-so-frozen Arctic to the dangerously narrow Bosporus. Some of these risks, and others, such as an earthquake and tsunami of the ferocity that hit Japan in 2011, had never been adequately modelled. That meant that estimating their risks, and therefore potential losses, were shots in the dark. 
 At the Lloyd's insurance market, which celebrates its 325th anniversary this year, the worrier-in-chief is Trevor Maynard, head of exposure management and reinsurance. He is 42, with snowy-white hair, a mathematician and actuary by training and obsessive about judging risks even in his quotidian life. In a recent Financial Times article, he said he goes to the airport a couple of hours before most people would "as a rational response to risk," such as a taxi breakdown. 
 It is hard to say when Lloyd's figured out that climate change posed serious risks, because Lloyd's is more concept than company. It's a market composed, at last count, of 87 syndicates whose thousands of investors underwrite policies for everything from kidnappings to offshore oil rigs. But there is no doubt the market's supervisors believe that the climate is changing. Lloyd's thinks the IPCC reports should be taken seriously and that surging CO2 concentrations could create epic disasters. 
 Maynard is the author of the British reinsurer's own seminal climate risk report, published in 2006, "Climate Change: Adapt or Bust." It too opened with a grabber: "Fact: If the sea level were to rise just four metres due to climate change, almost every coastal city in the world would be inundated." 
 He wrote the succinct, punchy report not just to highlight property risk from floods, but to encourage insurers to think about climate change's ripple effects, such as desperate people killing one another, even if the report does not quantify those risks. The world got a taste of post-catastrophe social mayhem in September, when the Mexican resort of Acapulco and other nearby areas suffered some of their worst storms and flooding in decades, stranding tens of thousands of people and claiming 130 lives. After the storms, looting broke out. The military was called out to stop the ransacking. 
 "We thought about terrorism, impact on economic assets, how equity prices might fall and corporate bond spreads might widen, and food security," Maynard says. "Imagine that climate-change increases lead to reductions in food yields. That would stress the food chain, and stressed communities will do whatever they need to to feed themselves. Well before those extremes, like war, are reached, you get pockets of terrorism coming up." 
 Identifying the next asbestos - whose claims are projected to ultimately cost the insurance industry more than $200 billion (U.S.) - is what Lloyd's in general and Maynard in particular look out for. One of the big emerging risks is wreck removal. It's an "emerging" risk because ships are reaching absurd dimensions to meet the demands of the market and investor returns.
 Lloyd's says six wrecks in the last decade have cost more than $100 million (U.S.) each to remove. Salvaging the wreck of the Costa Concordia, which smashed into a reef off the Tuscan island of Giglio in January, 2012, killing 32, is expected to cost $800 million (U.S.) - a record. The Costa Concordia, while enormous, is half the size of the 225,000-tonne Oasis of the Seas and her near-identical twin, Allure of the Seas, the largest cruise ships in service. Imagine the costs were they to go down - or if the same fate met ships plying the newly navigable Northwest Passage. 
 Maynard identifies "synthetic biology" as another looming risk, one with a potential connection to climate change. Consider, he says, a world with nine billion people (the projected population by 2050, or earlier) and falling crop yields, due to higher temperatures, more drought and irrigation-water shortages. A new green revolution would be needed. Enter genetically modified crops designed to be salt-, heat- or drought-resistant. "The effects of the large-scale use of technologies that you might rush out to meet a global food shortage on ecosystems are unknown," he says. As is a lot about the natural world, much as we humans think we know better. The question is, when will the rest of us recognize, as the reinsurers have, what's known? 
 ****** 
 Peter Höppe, head of geo-risks research  at reinsurer Munich Re, is proud  that the company identified the threat  posed by global warming in 1973
 Trevor Maynard, head of exposure management and reinsurance at Lloyd's, wrote a seminal report in 2006 that flagged the rising risks of famine, terrorism and war that will accompany continued warming of the planet 
 ONE YEAR'S TOLL IN NATURAL DISASTERS (2012 top 10 by overall losses)
 1. Hurricane Sandy (Oct.); overall losses: $65 billion; insured losses: $30 billion
 2. United States midwest (June to Sept.); drought
 3. Italy (May); earthquake 
 4. China (July); floods 
 5. United States gulf states (March); tornadoes 
 6. United States midwest (April); storm 
 7. Northeastern U.S. (June-July); storm 
 8. Texas (May); hailstorm 
 9. Pakistan (May); flood, landslides 
 10. North Korea (Sept.); floods 
 OTHER SIGNIFICANT NATURAL DISASTERS
 Central Europe (Jan.-Feb.); cold wave 
 Saskatchewan (Aug.); hailstorms 
 Germany (Jan.); Winter Storm Andrea 
 Ukraine (July); flash floods 
 England (Nov.); floods 
 Turkey (Aug.); earthquake 
 Iran (Jan.-March); cold wave 
 Gulf of Mexico (Aug.); Hurricane Isaac 
 Mexico (March); earthquake
 Nigeria (Oct.); floods 
 Colombia (March-June); floods 
 South Africa (Oct.); floods, hailstorms 
 China (Dec.); Typhoon Haikui 
 Philippines (Dec.); Typhoon Bopha 
 Australia (Jan.); flash floods 
 Australia (March); flash floods 

Load-Date: November 29, 2013


End of Document




Why the ROM is creating a climate-change curator
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 26, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: PURSUITS; Pg. P6
Length: 528 words
Byline: Kathryn Blaze Baum
Body


Lead
Allan Shiff grew up on a farm and occasionally hiked the Bruce Trail in Southern Ontario, but he had no firm connection to environmental causes - until 2006. That's when the British government released the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change, a massive report by noted economist Nicholas Stern that quantified the impact of climate change on the global economy.
Now 83, Shiff is thinking about his children's and grandchildren's inheritance.
But not of his money. Of the planet. To that end, Shiff donated $1.5-million to the Royal Ontario Museum for the creation of the Allan and Helaine Shiff Curatorship of Climate Change - an endowed role the ROM believes is a world first among major museums. The donation was matched by the Louise Hawley Stone Charitable Trust.
Texte/Text
In his lifetime, Shiff has seen the issue of climate change go from "zero to an existential threat."
"Sadly, we're getting free advertising: the fires that are going on today in the western United States, the smoke drifting up to British Columbia, the typhoons, the Arctic ice shelves in Canada that are disappearing," he said. "To sit back and do nothing is a very dangerous thing."
The international search for the inaugural curator began in earnest earlier this month, after being put on pause at the outset of the pandemic. The chosen candidate will not only be charged with ensuring that the ROM's collections contain items that reflect environmental issues, but also that the museum's programming - from symposiums to exhibitions and children's classes - engages visitors on key matters related to climate change.
Already, the ROM is integrating environment-related programming into its calendar. The Cloth that Changed the World, which opened earlier this month, takes a look at Indian chintz and its relationship with water crises. Opening in November, Wildlife Photographer of the Year features insights from ROM biodiversity experts.
Elias Sime: Tightrope, which opens in the spring, uses repurposed electronic components to comment on the urgency of ecological sustainability. And next summer's Into the Deep: A Tale of Three Whales explores the impacts of climate change on endangered whale species.
Shiff, though, wants his contribution to do more than fund shows that come and go. "I was not interested in seeing an exhibition where people come and say, 'Wasn't that fascinating?' and then go home and forget about it," he said. "The project must involve citizen engagement."
The ROM is Canada's largest museum, with 270,000 square feet of gallery space and upward of 1.5 million visitors in a typical fiscal year. ROM director and CEO Josh Basseches said the institution is projecting that attendance will be cut in half this year due to the pandemic. Still, he is optimistic that the inaugural curator will be able to leverage the museum's "bully pulpit" in order to educate the public and influence decision makers.
"We're one of the few great museums in the world that cut across art, culture and nature," he said. "Given that the climate crisis is really about the interrelationship between human actions and the natural world, we're uniquely situated to address it."

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document




Encana named in climate-related lawsuit; Company is one of 20 major energy players facing allegations that they deliberately misled consumers on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 21, 2017 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B3
Length: 712 words
Byline: O WEER, The Canadian Press
Body


Encana Corp. is named in three large lawsuits that attempt to link damages from climate change to industry's alleged attempts to hinder action to address it.
In the latest of a growing number of such lawsuits around the world, the Calgary-based company is one of 20 energy majors and their subsidiaries facing claims from three California communities. They allege the companies have deliberately sown misinformation and doubt on climate change and are at least partially responsible for related damages such as shoreline erosion.
"Defendants ... have known for nearly a half century that unrestricted production and use of their fossil fuel products create greenhouse gas pollution that warms the planet and changes our climate," says the lawsuit filed by the City of Imperial Beach.
"They have nevertheless engaged in a co-ordinated, multifront effort to conceal and deny their own knowledge of those threats, discredit the growing body of publicly available scientific evidence, and persistently create doubt in the minds of customers, consumers, regulators, the media, journalists, teachers, and the public about the reality and consequences of the impacts of their fossil fuel pollution."
Encana has not responded to requests for comment.
The lawsuits, filed Monday in California, draw on legal precedents used against tobacco companies, which reached a U.S. settlement of $368.5-billion (U.S.) in 1998.
"The plaintiffs have an uphill battle, but these are plausible claims," said Michael Burger, director of the Sabin Center for Climate Change Law at Columbia Law School.
Mr. Burger said that, as with tobacco companies, the energy industry knew its business was creating problems. Reports quoting documents from Exxon's archives suggest its management was told by its own scientists about greenhouse gases and climate change as early as 1977.
Instead of addressing the problem, the lawsuits allege, industry deployed think tanks, lobbyists and other means to obscure the science and resist regulation - much like the tobacco industry.
"You have a similar history of corporate malfeasance," Mr. Burger said.
But the climate lawsuits will have a much tougher time linking specific damages to industry actions, he said.
"To get from pulling it out of the ground all the way through the chain of manufacture, marketing, combustion - and through the climate change reality and then to sea-level rise causing specific impacts in these places - is a much longer chain of causation."
Similar lawsuits have been thrown out.
Vic Sher, the lawyer handling the litigation, said his lawsuits avoid conflicts with federal law that disallowed earlier attempts.
Fresh reports have made industry attempts to block change much clearer, he said. As well, research now allows scientists to make direct links between greenhouse gases, sea-level rise and individual producers.
"That causal connection we can now tie to particular companies."
The claim alleges the defendants are collectively behind about 20 per cent of total CO2 emissions between 1965 and 2015.
"It's an enormous volume and a substantial contribution to the problem," Mr. Sher said.
Kate Sears, supervisor for Marin County just north of San Francisco, said her communities are already suffering.
Previously rare flooding tides now occur about 15 times a year, she said. The only roads in and out for some coastal communities have been submerged.
A county assessment concluded in April that within 15 years, tidal flooding could threaten at least $15.5-billion in public and private assets, from homes to schools to wetlands.
"Climate change is not a theoretical problem for us," Ms. Sears said. "It's very, very real."
Martin Olszynski, a University of Calgary law professor who has published research on similarities between climate change and tobacco liability, said the cases are highly relevant to Canada as different court systems try to deal with the issue.
"Everyone's watching to see what different courts are doing, especially countries that share that common law tradition," he said. "There's a cumulative effect - you start to see more and more of these."
A report in March for the United Nations counted 654 cases in 24 countries that dealt with the science of climate change and mitigation efforts.
Encana (ECA)
Close: $12.17, down 36¢

Load-Date: July 21, 2017


End of Document




Folio: Climate change; From legacy vision to election issue; With his trip to Arctic Alaska, Obama's push for stronger environmental policies is thrusting climate change into the 2016 campaign. But as Oliver Sachgau reports, where the candidates stand varies widely
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 1, 2015 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 1081 words
Byline: Oliver Sachgau
Body


The climate shift in America
Barack Obama will be the first sitting U.S. president to set foot in the Arctic Circle. His three-day visit to Alaska is part of a bigger push on his part to cement climate change as a central part of his legacy.
It comes as climate change is expected to emerge as an unavoidable talking point in the 2016 election. For Democrats, that means building on what Mr. Obama started. For Republicans, it means rethinking the party line and figuring out how to stay relevant with a base of supporters where climatechange denial is still prevalent while also appealing to more moderate voters.
A Pew Research Center report in July, based on 2014 polls, shows almost three-quarters of Americans believe the Earth is getting warmer. Forty-six per cent of U.S adults believe that warming is due to human activity, while 22 per cent believe it's mostly because of natural patterns. A quarter of U.S adults do not believe there is solid evidence the Earth is getting warmer, according to the poll.
The numbers skew significantly by age. While 60 per cent of Americans aged 18 to 29 believe human activity is responsible for the Earth's warming, that number drops to 31 per cent for Americans aged 65 or older.
The numbers are also strongly divided along party and ideological lines. About 10 per cent of conservative Republicans believe human activity is causing the Earth's warming. For moderate Republicans, that number jumps to 36 per cent. For moderate Democrats, it stands at 63 per cent, while liberal Democrats had the highest percentage of believers in human-made climate change, at 78 per cent.
The Democratic view
The majority of Democratic supporters believe humans are the cause of climate change, and the party has played to that.
Where Mr. Obama had to navigate the politics of balancing interests of businesses with environmental groups, the party's current candidates for the presidency are taking a harder stance in favour of the environment.
On Aug. 3, Mr. Obama announced plans to reduce carbon levels from power plants by 32 per cent from 2005 levels by 2030. It's an aggressive plan that comes as part of a months-long effort that will culminate in Paris this December at a United Nations summit meeting where Mr. Obama is hoping to get a global accord on climate.
Though Mr. Obama is trying to make climate change part of his legacy, Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton has criticized his conflicting policies, such as approving Royal Dutch Shell to drill an exploratory well in the Chukchi Sea in the Arctic.
"The Arctic is a unique treasure. Given what we know, it's not worth the risk of drilling," Ms. Clinton said on Twitter the day after the drilling permit was granted.
Ms. Clinton, in a statement, called Mr. Obama's carbon plan "a significant step forward." On Twitter, however, she said it was "the floor, not the ceiling" in fighting climate change.
Bernie Sanders, another Democratic presidential candidate, praised Mr. Obama's carbon-reduction plan as a step forward. Unlike Ms. Clinton, Mr. Sanders has come out against the proposed Keystone XL pipeline.
Ms. Clinton has announced several ambitious environmental goals, should she be voted in as president. Among them is a plan to increase the United States' solar capacity seven-fold by the end of her first term and to have renewable energy account for a third of all the country's electricity by 2027.
The Republican view
For many years, supporters of the Republican Party have leaned against severe climate-change regulation. But that's changed. Several of the 2016 Republican presidential candidates acknowledge human-made climate change is real. Where they differ is on how to deal with it.
The dilemma is the balancing act of opposing Mr. Obama's policies while not coming off as climate-change deniers, for fear of losing out on moderate voters. Some of the candidates oppose Mr. Obama's specific regulations, not general action against climate change. Carly Fiorina, former chief executive officer of Hewlett-Packard, summed up this position when she said "the answer to this problem is innovation, not regulation."
Former Florida governor Jeb Bush told the Wall Street Journal last week he believes human activity has contributed to climate change. "I think it's appropriate to invest in the proper research to fund solutions over the long haul," he told the Journal, adding those solutions shouldn't be "too alarmist."
Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker has opposed Mr. Obama's plan to reduce pollution from coalfired plants. He is one of a few governors who followed Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's call for governors to refuse to comply with the proposed carbon-reduction program.
Donald Trump has said he doesn't believe global warming is real. "I call it weather. You know, the weather changes," he told the Palin Update radio show.
Mr. Trump has also praised Canada's environmental policies, specifically referring to the Canadian government's push for a Keystone XL pipeline. Mr. Trump owns about $250,000 (U.S.) worth of shares in TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.
The effect on Canada
The focus on climate change in the United States will have an effect in Canada, where the climatechange policy has always been closely tied to that of the United States. There is enormous economic pressure on Canada to match - but not exceed - the level of regulations in the United States, according to Douglas Macdonald, a senior lecturer on the environment at the University of Toronto. In the 1990s, business interests lobbied for policies that wouldn't put them at a disadvantage when exporting to the United States, Mr. Macdonald said.
"Canada had to be careful not to diverge too much from American policy because we were so dependent on exporting into that economy," Mr. Macdonald told The Globe and Mail on Monday.
Since then, Canada has largely kept step with the United States, with a few notable exceptions, such as the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty to reduce CO2 emissions, which Canada ratified in 2002, while the United States pulled out.
If a Democrat with a more aggressive climatechange policy gets into the White House, the economic pressure to follow suit will be huge, Mr. Macdonald said.
"If they started to act in a way Obama didn't when he was first elected, then that would open the door to Canadian federal action," he said.
If the administration turns out to be Republican, with little or no action on the climate-change front, it will remove any pressure to align upward, he said.

Load-Date: September 1, 2015


End of Document




Folio: Climate change; CHINA'S SEA CHANGE; As rising water levels along the Guangdong coast threaten to create havoc in its economic heartland, China's leadership is recognizing the country's increasing vulnerability to climate change, reports Nathan VanderKlippe
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 5, 2015 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 1470 words
Byline: Nathan VanderKlippe
Body


At Pleasant Banyan Bay in China's southern Guangdong province, couples flock by the dozens for elaborately staged wedding photos on the white sand. Large signs on a nearby hotel shout, "Forever."
But the love on display here might outlast the sand. A rising sea has narrowed the main beach by 10 metres and scoured around trees, exposing their roots. Smaller beaches on the fringes of the bay have already vanished.
"I know the glaciers and the poles are melting and that's why the water is rising," said Chen Hong, 48, a lifeguard who has worked on this beach since 2000. Watching the water slowly creep upward has made him a pessimist.
"With the sea level rising so much, water is going to occupy a lot of land," he said. "Earth may have given birth to humans. But it seems like, in the end, humans will destroy the Earth."
No country on Earth has more people at risk from the sea-level rise than China, where 85 million people live on land that will either be flooded or at risk of inundation in the future, according to an analysis based on a six-metre sea-level rise published in Science this year.
A 900-page Chinese climate science report released recently points to sea levels as one of the chief risks to the country, saying some coastal "cities may even face risks of massive disasters that are hard to forecast."
And Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong province, will experience greater losses than any other major global city, the World Bank has warned. The sprawling industrial complex now rooted in the region's Pearl River Delta has been a principal source of China's enormous new wealth in recent decades. But what has proved fertile land for development has also come laden with the risk of floods. Most of the delta lies within a metre of sea level. About 13 per cent lies below sea level - not far off the 26 per cent in the Netherlands.
As sea levels rise, the World Bank forecast annual losses of $17.5-billion per year by 2050 for Guangzhou, the highest in dollar terms and, as a percentage of gross domestic product, among the world's 136 largest coastal cities. Last year, the losses from ocean disasters in Guangdong totalled $1.25-billion, local leaders have said.
"Guangzhou is somewhere where there's a huge amount of exposure, and I think it's pretty vulnerable," said Robert Nicholls, a professor of coastal engineering at the University of Southampton and one of the authors of the World Bank report.
"Many of the cities in Asia are built on deltas, so they are by definition almost at the hazard water levels," he said.
"And climate change will make that worse."
The toll of climate change looms large over China in the midst of the Paris climate talks, which the country entered with a posture far different from its past obstruction of global agreements. Chinese President Xi Jinping called Paris "a new starting point." In 2009, Beijing was singled out as the architect of failure at the Copenhagen climate talks. Delegates and secret recordings at the time described how China - which, in a snub, sent its deputy foreign minister to sit across the table from leaders such as U.S. President Barack Obama - sabotaged the talks, insisting that important targets be stripped out and, in the end, humiliating those who sought a landmark deal.
But the past 12 months have seen a sea change in China's climate posture - an underappreciated pivot from laggard to leader.
Late last year, Beijing and Washington agreed to a surprise deal that would see China halt its emissions growth by 2030.
It followed that up with a more detailed plan this June to cut emissions per unit of GDP by nearly two-thirds from 2005 levels. It then injected $4.1-billion into the South-South Co-operation Fund on Climate Change, money other developing nations can spend on projects to cope with global warming.
Beijing has been "engaging others very actively, to bring others together for a successful Paris process," said Changhua Wu, greater China director for the Climate Group, a non-profit organization that advocates a low-carbon future.
It is driven, in part, by self-interest.
The slowing of China's economy has underscored the problems with the coalheavy and carbon-intense development that has driven growth for nearly four decades. Chinese leadership now wants green energy to become a new economic pillar. It's a strategy that aligns with national priorities on innovation, energy security and job creation.
And since China is already the largest manufacturer and consumer of wind and solar energy, the country has a running start.
"It's a fascinating trend," Ms. Wu said.
Major countries "are literally transforming their economic structure and energy structure in order to address climatechange issues, and link that very, very closely with how they grow their economy," she said.
Such a transition has had high-level champions in China, including Zhu Yanlai, the daughter of former Chinese premier Zhu Rongji.
She helped with a team that drafted a document on constructing "ecological civilization." It outlines a multifaceted plan to direct infrastructure investment into greener technology; use credit and fiscal policy to push businesses into energy-efficient systems; encourage education to emphasize green innovation; and employ propaganda to spread the word about conservation and reduced consumption.
Those ideas were earlier this year closely mirrored in a policy decision on "accelerating the development of ecological civilization" by the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the country's State Council.
"Deng Xiaoping said to get rich is glorious. I think Xi Jinping will say ecological civilization is glorious," said Laurence Brahm, founder of the Himalayan Consensus and one of the drivers behind the ecological civilization document.
Change has been driven not just by hope of a wealthier future, but also fear of a more challenging one.
"China is aware of how climate change is impacting various aspects of its society, from water, agriculture, urban centres, human health and so on," said Rebecca Nadin, the Asia-Pacific regional director for green non-profit Intasave and co-editor of Climate Risk and Resilience in China.
Melting glaciers are raising fears about future water shortages. Rising temperatures have expanded the danger area for infectious diseases: Malaria risks are rising and last year, China saw 46,864 dengue cases, up tenfold from the prior year after an outbreak in Guangdong.
The breakneck pace of development has worsened local vulnerability, in particular to saltwater incursion that can damage crops and foul drinking water.
"The tendency of the salt tides is getting worse," said Chen Tegu, a professor emeritus at the South China Sea Institute of Oceanology of the China Academy of Sciences in Guangzhou. He is the country's first academic to study sea-level rise.
"The reason it's getting worse is mostly because of human behaviour and activities," he said, pointing to sand dug from river beds to fuel major land-reclamation projects, and reservoirs that have held back river water from the sea.
The region has been protected from the sea-level rise by well-built dikes, he said.
But dikes have their own risks: The higher they are built, the more catastrophic the consequences if they one day prove insufficient.
A recent Chinese publication, called The Third National Climate Change Assessment Report, warns that water levels are rising faster around China than the global average. "Climate change will make the urban conurbations along the coast the regions most affected by climate change nationwide," it says.
The region's vulnerabilities are already on display.
Just south of Guangzhou at Million Sunflower Garden, a tourist attraction with fields of bright yellow blooms, workers switch to tap water in the winter because encroaching salt tides turn the local streams saline. In those months, sunflowers are stunted and produce less than half their normal weight in seeds. "We have less output, the flowers are small and less colourful," said Hu Xiangui, 28, who is in charge of the plantation. "It happens every year."
Meanwhile, not far from Pleasant Banyan Bay, a crumbling stretch of shoreline near a highway toll booth stands as one of the area's most striking symbols of what happens when the waves rise. Here, a section of land roughly eight metres wide and several hundred metres long has fallen down onto the shore below. The area once had a small beach. It is today mostly a jumble of rocks and concrete.
"It collapsed bit by bit," says Zhao Shoujun, a cook at a nearby office.
A government sign now warns of hazards on a bicycle path that runs along the edge of the eroded land.
"They've suggested tourists not come here because it looks kind of dangerous," Mr. Zhao says. "If there aren't any dikes built, I think most of the coastline will become like this."

Load-Date: December 5, 2015


End of Document




CLIMATE CHANGE; SHELTERS FROM THE STORM; Rising sea levels, epic droughts, massive flooding: the effects of climate change are already here. How do we adapt? From the Netherlands to Manhattan's Lower East Side, Alex Bozikovic explores the cutting-edge engineering - and cultural shifts - that could help
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 18, 2015 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS; Pg. F1
Length: 4821 words
Byline: Alex ozikovic
Body


Seventy per cent of the Earth's surface is water, though most people focus on the other 30 per cent. Henk Ovink keeps his eyes on the line in between. A wiry, fasttalking expert on water management, Mr. Ovink grew up between sea and land, in eastern Holland. "It is a place that is made out of water," Mr. Ovink says of his home country.
Now Mr. Ovink's job is to explain to the rest of the world, as his country's Special Envoy for International Water Affairs, how the Dutch have done it: how they've thrived, over nearly 1,000 years, by building a complex network of dikes, dams and floodgates to hold back the sea.
"We survived not only because we have great engineers and designers," he says, "but mostly because we have learned to work together.
Even before we were a kingdom, we built a collaborative approach to build a safe place for all."
He hopes cities across the globe will follow that example. With the increasing effects of climate change, urban dwellers must brace for a new reality in which extreme weather events are more frequent, less predictable - and more deadly - than ever before. Two to four billion people in coastal regions could be hit hard. We are all, in a sense, Dutch.
Except that we, unlike the Dutch, don't have centuries to get used to our new, endangered status. In Canada, scientists predict that climate change will mean rising sea levels that affect Vancouver; glacial melt and flooding, but also water shortages, on the Prairies; more frequent and powerful storms battering Montreal and Toronto with ice and vicious rains. The 2013 storms in Alberta, which killed five people and made a $6-billion mess, will not be the last to shake the country.
Our need to cope with long-term climate shifts - known by the bland term "adaptation" - is acute. "You hear lots of people talk about climate change, but very little on adaptation to climate change," says Blair Feltmate, an ecologist at the University of Waterloo. "We need to be doing that. Right now. And we need to think about where water is going to be 25 or 50 years from now."
The challenge goes beyond high water. It is, in fact, so vast and diffuse that it's hard to get our heads around it, a drumbeat of disaster demanding action: emergency-response plans, new wetlands, stronger power grids, big piles of soil and clay. Some of it will be hard and expensive; some will be easy.
None of it will be possible without a change of mindset.
"We have a management-by-disaster mentality," Dr. Feltmate says.
"What we need to do is take a different approach - to avoid having problems in the first place." In other words, we need to live and build like the Dutch.
Remaking our culture, and our cities, will be slow work. North America's richest and most influential city, New York, was hit by Hurricane Sandy in 2012, and it is thinking big about resilience - yet changes there are still difficult to detect. Even the Dutch have needed a reminder: the country's largest new sea defences were put in place after the infamous North Sea Flood of 1953, which killed more than 1,800 people.
A generation ago, Canada learned similar lessons from disasters, and responded. The Red River floodway was built after Winnipeg was washed out in 1950, and in 1954 Hurricane Hazel led to the creation of the Toronto Regional Conservation Authority to preserve that area's rivers and ravines. Do we need to be slammed again before we move to protect ourselves for the future?
New York state of mind
In a city of islands, bays and peninsulas, the sea has always been there, coursing and lapping, rarely raising its voice.
Victor Papa never worried much about it. He has lived his 70 years in a neighbourhood - the Lower East Side of Manhattan - where the East River will occasionally flood across the concrete and asphalt. "All my life," he says, "we were part of the river. We were in the river. " So on the night that Hurricane Sandy blew into New York, promising disaster, he scoffed at the TV. "The lights were on, and I said, 'These weather reports are exaggerated. What are they trying to do?' Then, I heard an explosion."
It came from an electrical substation about three kilometres north of his apartment. The local power utility, Con Edison, had built it to survive the highest recorded storm surge, from 1956.
Sandy pushed the water about a foot over the top. The substation went up with a blue flash and a boom. Mr. Papa's lights went out.
More than 600,000 people were without power, and often without water, for a week. "The impossible became possible," Mr. Papa says.
For the city's government, the storm was sobering. "Sandy really highlighted the risks for us," says Daniel Zarrilli, director of the New York Mayor's Office of Recovery and Resiliency. "It revealed a lot of the vulnerabilities we knew we had - showing them up in a very stark way."
Yet the superstorm did not catch New York totally unprepared. Although Mr. Zarrilli's office was established after the storm, the city and local experts had spent years thinking about resilience - the capacity to prepare for, and respond to, crisis.
The city even has its own Panel on Climate Change, which assesses local risks. But how ready was it for Sandy in Mr. Papa's neighbourhood? Not very, by his account.
In the days after a disaster, there is crucial work to be done in getting a city back up and running: providing medical care, water, food, power. On the Lower East Side, city agencies and the Red Cross were hardly in the area at all, Mr. Papa says. He is the director of Two Bridges Neighbourhood Council, a non-profit group that manages two towers of rental housing. One of them, 10 storeys tall, houses seniors, and its elevators failed when the storm flooded the basement.
Two Bridges, a tiny organization, found itself delivering food and water, and checking on residents' well-being. Mr. Papa mentions one tenant, an elderly single woman who is deaf and has limited mobility. "When you rang her doorbell, a light would go on in the apartment - but now that didn't work. So she was wondering what the hell was going on."
Only Two Bridges staff - her neighbours - knew how to help her.
This sort of local knowledge and engagement is known as "social resilience," and it was especially important in the Lower East Side and surrounding neighbourhoods.
It is also easy to overlook. Fortyfour people, ages two to 90, died in New York, and most of them lived along the sea. Their deaths, and the physical devastation of waterfront neighbourhoods in Brooklyn and Staten Island, drew much of the media coverage. Yet in Lower Manhattan, the storm affected hundreds of thousands more people: the social cost was, in Mr. Papa's words, "a human disaster."
'Giant global loudspeaker'
In planning for resilience, policy-makers have to play Solomon, and in a city of 8.4 million people, with 835 kilometres of coastline, the scale of the challenge is monumental: Mr. Zarrilli is now overseeing 257 projects in New York.
The aftermath of Sandy presented a rare opportunity "to buy down risk," Mr. Zarrilli says. The federal government poured $10.5billion (U.S.) into the country's Northeast for reconstruction after the storm, including $3.2-billion into New York alone.
The city's $3.7-billion coastal resiliency plan includes many small projects, such as green roofs and bioswales - small gardens that capture and absorb stormwater.
None will be transformative, but they will have a cumulative impact.
There are also, necessarily, some massive projects. A highprofile design competition called Rebuild By Design - run in part by Mr. Ovink - solicited big ideas to build resilience. One of the winners was called the Dryline, and its face is the Danish architect Bjarke Ingels. Mr. Ingels, at just 40, has become one of the world s most prominent architects on the strength of his ability to reframe tough problems with so-crazyit's-brilliant leaps of logic.
In this case, Mr. Ingels sees New York's infrastructure spending as an opportunity to make a more beautiful city. "The Chinese character for crisis is the combination of 'danger' and 'opportunity,' " he tells me in his Lower Manhattan office, overlooking the harbour from the safety of the top floor. The Dryline team included nine other firms of landscape architects, ecologists and planners. They imagined a system of flood protection looping around the tip of Lower Manhattan and also serving as parks and open space. "Our thinking was: What if you design it from the get-go for positive social impacts?" Mr. Ingles says.
The Dryline is as sexy as infrastructure gets. In drawings, it is imagined as a series of verdant hills, flip-up barriers, Technicolor planters and benches - all designed to animate the edge of the water while controlling floods from the rivers and the harbour.
The project, as it gets built, could set an important global benchmark.
"Manhattan is a giant global loudspeaker," Mr. Ingels says.
"Anything you say here is definitely heard louder and clearer.
Which raises the bar and responsibility to build precedents."
How much of the Dryline's elegant urban design will get built is an open question. So far, only one section is underway, a $335-million (U.S.) first phase covering an East River area that houses an aging and vulnerable population, and the power plant that turned out Mr. Papa's lights.
But its berms will stop at the northern edge of the Lower East Side. In a storm, it will not help the buildings overseen by Mr. Papa and Two Bridges - maybe the opposite. If the river floods and hits the barriers to the north, will the water push even farther into their streets? "We're very concerned about overflow," says Two Bridges associate director Kerri Culhane. "We realize we're on the front line here, and nothing is being done to protect us."
The city is studying that issue, but there are many other challenges to consider. To survive in an unpredictable climate, a society must always be thinking about weather: What is the worst case?
And how can we be ready?
A successful case study is visible from Mr. Ingels's office windows: Governors Island. The northern half of the 172-acre island is on high ground and houses structures dating back to the American Revolutionary War. West 8 - a Rotterdam and New York-based landscape architecture firm that won a design competition to remake the island as a park - focused on the southern part, where the Coast Guard had built on landfill.
Its solution was what West 8 partner Jamie Maslyn Larson calls "transformation through topography." It raised the level of the ground in the vulnerable section by about four metres. Some areas around the fringes were designed as lawns and ball fields, with grass and trees that can handle a drink of seawater. As the site rises, curvaceous white concrete curbs direct floodwater along paved paths and back to low ground.
The Trust for Governors' Island, the nonprofit group that runs the site, footed the bill for this strategy, which involved shipping 80,000 cubic yards of landfill onto the island. That paid off right away. The park had begun construction in October, 2012, and when Hurricane Sandy was coming in, the construction crews parked their machines on that new, higher ground. The floodwaters that night exceeded the most current 100-year flood projection - yet the excavators and graders remained dry, and much of the park, including hundreds of new trees, survived more or less intact.
"The next day, we were ready to get back to work," says Ellen Cavanagh, the trust's director of planning, design and construction. "I'm glad," she adds, "that our landscape architects were Dutch."
The Dutch way with water
In his 1936 poem Memory of Holland, Hendrik Marsman wrote: "in every district/ the voice of the water/ with its eternal disasters/is heard and is feared." If any nation understands the vagaries of weather and water, it is the Netherlands. Huge areas of the country's land mass have been reclaimed from the sea, and its waterways have wandered dangerously, growing and shrinking and changing shape, through the centuries.
Yet despite nearly a thousand years of building against the sea, it took two disasters in the 20th century for the country to get its defences in order. The Netherlands was hit by a deadly storm surge in 1916, and then in 1953 the North Sea Flood hit. This event "was like the 9/11 of Holland," says Adriaan Geuze, a principal of West 8.
The response was the Delta Project, a collection of public works that reshaped the coast of the southwestern Netherlands. A comprehensive system of surge barriers, dams, locks and dikes was designed to deliver particular levels of flood protection, dictated by legislation - work that continued through the 1990s. In other words, reestablishing a comfortable level of protection against the sea took half a century. "It's a myth that you wake up the next morning and everything will be okay," Mr. Ovink says. "But that is not a reason to stand still.
You should start now: it will take a generation."
The Dutch tradition of reclaiming low-lying land goes back about 1,000 years. After storms reshaped the coast in the 12th century, the Dutch drained and protected increasingly large swaths of terrain. Water management became central to the culture and politics of the area; farmers and landowners pooled resources. Count Willem II of Holland founded the first water board in 1255, and the modern Dutch state has 25 of them - regional bodies responsible for water barriers and management, each governed by an assembly of households, landowners, building owners and industry representatives.
The boards, elected through a different system than local or federal governments, have the independence to think long-term.
That capacity, Mr. Ovink says, is crucial. "Most places only respond to a disaster," he says. "I work all over the world and I see this: A long-term regional plan will fail to build resiliency if there is not the institutional capacity to lead it over the years."
The contemporary Dutch approach to water management includes large and small moves.
Rotterdam, the country's second biggest city, is 90 per cent below sea level. It is protected by infrastructure measured in kilometres; its main shipping channel has a 13,000-tonne pair of surge gates that can be closed in anticipation of a storm.
Its urban design and architecture are also prepared to reduce the impact of extreme weather.
As Mr. Ovink says, "You can't keep an umbrella over the whole city." Rotterdam and the local water board commissioned the design of a downtown "water square," which captures rainwater from nearby buildings and streets.
The design by local firm de Urbannisten makes a spectacle of the water as it moves over falls and through glimmering steel gutters, disappearing into a massive holding tank and being slowly, safely dispersed.
But the Dutch also realize their previous strategies won't be enough. Along the Rhine River and its branches, large areas have been enclosed by dikes over the past 1,000 years. Now, climate scientists are recording heavier rains and predicting still further increases. In the Netherlands, as elsewhere, the sort of event that used to be a 1,000-year storm or a 500-year flood is happening with distressing regularity. The historic solution - building dikes higher and higher - will no longer work.
And so the Netherlands is well into a new set of water projects, called Room for the River, that turn 1,000 years of tradition upside down - working with, not against, the water. "We have reinvented the past," Mr. Ovink says.
Its 39 sites are employing every imaginable water-management tactic, from creating new reservoirs to deepening riverbeds. In many places, they are lowering barriers, removing dikes and - strategically - allowing the rivers to flood on a grand scale.
In Nijmegen, the country's oldest city, this means broadening the River Waal. Instead of raising dikes, a Room for the River project is moving them back by 350 metres. In the resulting space, a new channel has been cut to expand the river. The city, to the south, gains a measure of safety; a new island in the river adds to the region's parkland, and the city is building a new quay and constructing housing on the north side.
However, the land that's being surrendered to the river was not empty. A village, Lent, was home to about 50 families. "In the beginning, [those] people were not happy," says Karsten Schipperheijn, a project manager working with the local government on the plan. Some were farm families "who had lived there for ages," and some were retirees who had moved into this green area "to live there for the last 20 beautiful years of their life."
The answers: money, and respectful conversation. "We had discussions at their kitchen tables - it was important to hear their stories," Mr. Schipperheijn says.
In the end, the city was able to address their concerns: Every one of the 50 households voluntarily accepted a buyout.
To Mr. Geuze of West 8, this response is characteristically Dutch.
"In Holland," he explains, "the social and political acceptance of water measures is fundamental. If government wants to change something to build a road, it is a not-in-my-backyard culture. But for water, it is different."
For Americans, and even for Canadians, it will be impossible to replicate the long tradition of public works on which the Netherlands is founded. But Mr. Ovink suggests that the very process of assessing our vulnerabilities, and correcting for them, can itself change our culture. One engineering solution "in itself doesn't build resilience." he says. "We need a suite of interventions - and that over time builds social resilience."
Canada: of rivers and seas
Social resilience is a technical term for a simple concept: the capacity of community members to take care of each other. And Mr. Ovink's idea is an elegant one.
This spring, Ottawa launched a $200-million National Disaster Mitigation Program. Could Canadians pull together on resilience as a new national project, despite the country's geographic spread and its differences of culture and climate?
If so, it would be by thinking of climate change and resilience in very personal terms. Alec Hay, a civil engineer who teaches resilience planning at the University of Toronto, has set students an exam question: An elderly woman lives alone, and she is isolated after a winter power outage. How does she eat? Who looks after her? Engineering has no answers.
"Difficult things will happen," he says. "People have to look after each other."
A major ice storm or flood is likely to generate massive infrastructure problems as well, so resilience must also involve turning the lights back on. The policial and conceptual problem is that there is no one-size-fits-all strategy: In Canada the disaster scenarios vary between ocean cities and river cities. The challenges, and their solutions, are local.
The picture along the ocean is complex, says Glenn Milne, Canada Research Chair in Earth System Dynamics at the University of Ottawa. Sea-level rise "is not going to be a tidal wave smashing things to bits," he says. "It's going to be slow, eating it away faster and faster. And then there will be storms." What it will look like depends on where you are. For most of Canada's coastline, the impact of climate change will likely bring sea level down - but at a certain point as you move south, sea level will start to rise.
In Nova Scotia, he predicts, many buildings and towns will be vulnerable to flooding. "There are lot of houses close to the coastline.
That area will be one of the hardest hit in Canada."
Vancouver, with its large population and flood-prone low geography, will be more vulnerable. "If you look at a map of Vancouver and imagine a sea-level rise of one metre, you get a totally different city," says Craig Applegath, a Canadian architect who consults on sustainability and resiliency.
Indeed, the city is implementing an adaptation strategy that includes hardening individual buildings against flooding and limiting development in flood plains. A 2013 study suggested that the city would be among the top-20 most vulnerable in the world, but that local measures would provide some degree of protection.
For river cities, climate change is likely to mean more rain and storms of greater frequency and magnitude. On the Prairies, warmer temperatures bring increased snowmelt. "In Edmonton and Calgary, the rivers are fed by the Rockies," Mr. Applegath says.
""As the climate warms, you have the snowmelt from the winter before happening in the spring, plus you have the glaciers - which have been there forever - melting. You add a flash storm and you get [the Calgary flood] again."
"Kim Sturgess, a Calgary water engineer, says the city is unusual in being so close to the mountains. "Where in a major storm Winnipeg will get a gigantic amount of water, they'll get four days' notice," she says. "We get half an hour."
"To be ready on that kind of notice demands that everyone has a sense of what's coming. That sense has been in place in Calgary for a while: The city built its environmental operations centre and improved its planning after the floods of 2005, and was quite well-prepared for the 2013 flood.
"When it is again time to evacuate, many Calgarians will be ready.
"Preparedness is one thing; prevention is another. Late last year, Ms. Sturgess authored a report that looks at the Bow River basin with a Dutch eye. "How do you give the river room to move so it doesn't cause a lot of damage?" Ms. Sturgess asks. "If you look at that study, here in the Calgary area, every option about what to do was put on the table."
"The report emphasizes the naturalization of the river's edges and imagines relocating old infrastructure, more buyouts of property owners, limiting new development, closing of old infrastructure sites and returning them to the river. "There are a lot of different ways of going at the issue, and they need to be assessed," Ms. Sturgess says.
"Some major projects have already been put in motion, though critics argue they are more about gratifying political impulses than meeting infrastructure needs. In the wake of the 2013 storm, the Prentice government was focused on big infrastructure works, the sort of project that brings the sense of reassurance - and the political payoff - that more nuanced strategies do not. The government announced three major projects along the Elbow River, including the Springbank Off-Stream Reservoir introduced last September. It would add a new dam and berm to divert water from the Elbow, when the river floods, into a new basin west of Calgary. The reservoir had not been anticipated by local water management plans, and the proposal faced stiff oppositiuon from some locals; during this spring's campaign, the NDP signalled that it would oppose that project.
"Since taking office, the Notley government has not yet firmed up its position. Jason Penner, a public affairs officer with Alberta Environment and Parks, says the department is still waiting for direction. "There will likely be a test checking how the three Elbow River projects would go together - a cost-benefit analysis of having all three," he says.
"Deadly lessons of Hazel
"What good is an analysis if government won't follow it? Or if each new government sees the need to revisit its assumptions?
"Without long-term commitments from the province and municipalities, and the steady financial backing of the federal government, building resilience in Canada - or anywhere for that matter - is impossible.
"Globally, Mr. Ovink says, this is a profound challenge. "The problem with big projects is that they take a long time," he says with a laugh. And on the other hand, slow consultative work doesn't pay off politically. "Nobody wants to be the mayor who built a plan," Mr. Ovink says.
"In some places, it is the insurance industry that may lead the way toward a better understanding of the issues. Dr. Feltmate works on research with the insurer Intact, which is spearheading pilot projects for soft infrastructure, such as planting new wetlands to help with drainage, on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. So far the Canadian insurance industry has little exposure to flood events, since overland flood insurance is largely unavailable here. But the floods of 2013 had sewers backing up in the Toronto neighbourhood of Downsview, several kilometres from the nearest river. Insurers largely paid for the repairs, though Feltmate says they are reluctant to cover the endangered area. Where is next?
""Calgary was a $6.1-billion flood, the worst in Canadian history," Dr. Feltmate says. "But what worries the insurance industry is the $30-billion flood that wipes out the Fraser Valley. Or the flood that wipes out Kingston. Since there's no chance we're going backward on climate change, this is what we have to think about."
"Even if Canada moves in the right direction, Mr. Ovink cautions that the next few decades will be wet and wild. "There will be devastating events," he says.
""There will be casualties. Just because you understand a risk doesn't mean it won't hit you."
"This week Toronto, the province of Ontario and the federal government announced $5-million toward a proposal to renaturalize the mouth of the Don River in downtown Toronto - work that will soften the edges of the river and make it less prone to flooding. It's a move in the right direction, but small and overdue. It will allow important new development in the area - and yet existing neighbourhoods to the east of the river are vulnerable to flooding right now. "You can't let a portion of the city float out into the lake," says community activist Julie Beddoes, "when there are plans in someone's drawer to fix it."
"The other side of the river - downtown Toronto - is lucky that such a washout hasn't already happened. That too is a flood plain. Until recently, a large hurricane along the Don River could have sent water coursing through King and Bay streets, flooding subways and crippling the country's largest city. And that danger was never a major political issue.
"A solution - a berm, or earthwork, along the Don River - was first proposed in the mid-1980s.
"The government agency Waterfront Toronto finally built a $135million, 8.5-metre-high bank of soil and clay in 2012.
"A weather-related disaster would help focus the minds of citizens and governments. But of course Toronto has already had one: Hurricane Hazel in 1954.
"West of the Don is the Humber, Toronto's other major river. Here, in a broad swath of valley, lies Raymore Drive, where Hazel hit with its deadliest force. The river dammed up with debris at a bridge, then broke loose and swamped a stretch of modest suburban houses. Thirty-two people lost their lives in one little block.
"I went there this week to see where their houses once sat. The area is now public land, one of the many ravine parks managed by the region's conservation authority to keep the city safe from more floods. An odd meadow of wildflowers fills the valley floor, a few ash and ironwood struggling with what's buried under the surface. In the water, ragged hunks of concrete from the broken bridge remain where they fell.
"This is where Canadians once made room for the river - proof that we are able to adapt, after we have been hit hard enough.
"Alex Bozikovic is The Globe and Mail's architecture critic.
"
"Associated Graphic
"A series of projects, large and small, are in the works to help New York adapt to the worst effects of climate change. They include everything from parkland upgrades to the Dryline, a proposed 12-kilometre-long band of hills, bridges and flood barriers decorated by local artists.
"
"A rendering shows part of a proposal to protect New York from rising water levels: walls attached to the underside of FDR Drive, ready to flip down to prepare for floods. 
"
"BJARKE INGELS GROUP
"
"Community leader and Lower East Side resident Victor Papa describes Hurricane Sandy as "a human disaster" for which the city was ill-prepared. 
"
"ERIC THAYER FOR THE GLOBE AND MAIL
"
"The key to successful climate change strategies, is melding infrastructure development with social resilience - using public space to build communities as well as physical protection from the elements. 
"
"BJARKE INGELS GROUP
"
"From left to right: high water at the Eastern Scheldt storm surge barrier in Oosterschelde, the Netherlands; the giant Maeslant Barrier that guards entrance to Rotterdam, the largest port in Europe; a tow truck driver floats a car out of the Don Valley Parkway in Toronto during the floods of 2013. 
"
"BAS CZERWINSKI/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; ROB DOOLAARD/EPA; FRANK GUNN/THE CANADIAN PRESS
"
"The Maeslant Barrier, a 13,000-tonne pair of surge gates that helps protect the main shipping channel in Rotterdam. 
"
"COR MULDER/EPA
"
"On October 18, 1954, the Holland River flooded in the aftermath of Hurricane Hazel. Southern Ontario was pounded with more than 200 millimetres of rain in less than 24 hours. 
"
"THE GLOBE AND MAIL 

Load-Date: July 18, 2015


End of Document




I want to be a climate-change specialist. What will my salary be?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 17, 2018 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: CAREERS; Pg. B13
Length: 704 words
Byline: JARED LINDZON, Special to The Globe and Mail
Body


Job: Climate-change specialist
The role: To inform business decision makers on how climate change may affect their operations, and how to adapt. For example, organizations that utilize natural resources may hire a climate-change specialist to analyze which materials are likely to become more scarce in the near future as a result of climate change, or how sea-level rise might affect coastal real estate markets.
"They would analyze weather models - potentially coming from the government or potentially developed themselves. There's a lot of prep work, a lot of in-depth planning, secondary research, primary research and then taking the data and making analyses and creating prediction models," said Kevin Nilsen, the president and chief executive officer of Environmental Careers Organization (ECO) Canada, a not-for-profit environmental human-resources organization.
Mr. Nilsen explains that the role is part weather forecaster, part adviser, part project-development manager, part research publisher and part stakeholderrelations manager. The climatechange specialist's primary responsibility is to ultimately inform business leaders how to adapt their business in order to respond to a changing climate.
Salary: According to research conducted by ECO Canada, the salary for climate change specialists starts between $45,000 and $50,000 a year, with senior roles earning an average of $90,000 to $100,000 annually. Climate-change specialists with a university degree earn an average of $47,000 a year, while those with a postgraduate degree and some career experience earn between $58,000 and $72,000 a year on average.
Mr. Nilsen, however, predicts that opportunities and salaries will increase as more industries identify the need for climate-change specialists.
Education: While there are no licensing requirements or mandatory educational programs, climate-change specialists often hold at least a bachelor's degree and more commonly a master's degree in either a scientific or policy-related field.
"These are highly educated positions with backgrounds in environmental science, climate science, atmospheric sciences, meteorology, engineering and physics," Mr. Nilsen said.
"Some also come in with social sciences backgrounds in policy and urban planning, because some jobs are more on the policy and advising side - either impacting policy at the government level or interpreting how that policy needs to be followed on the compliance side."
Job prospects: According to Mr. Nilsen, the need for climate-change specialists is growing rapidly across the country because of two key factors: government subsidies and economics.
"Because it's such a major focus of the government, with that target of net-zero [building] emissions [by 2030], there's lots of subsidies in this area, which is why a tremendous amount of jobs will be created as a result," he said.
Challenges: Because it is still a relatively new and unregulated field, climate-change specialists often struggle to demonstrate the value of their work, and employers often confuse their roles with that of corporate-social-responsibility departments and cleanenergy advocates.
"There are many people that dabble in the climate-change area with different agendas, and the real value is yet to be fully demonstrated, which will come with time and maybe certification," Mr. Nilsen said.
Why they do it: Climatechange specialists work in a relatively new field with significant opportunity for growth.
"You're at the forefront of something that is going to be very, very important and is increasingly important as we go along," Mr. Nilsen said.
"Getting in now and learning the ropes early on will lead to a very meaningful career, and specialists in this area will be highly sought after as the impacts of climate change continue to increase."
Misconceptions: Climate-change specialists are often mistaken for environmental advocates, when in fact the role is very scientific and more focused on business outcomes than footprint reduction.
"This is not someone who's trying to be on the barricade arguing how people need to change their lifestyles," Mr. Nilsen said. "This is a highly scientific role trying to understand patterns, predict outcomes and guide decision making."

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document




New bond index warns investors of Canada's climate-change risk
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 23, 2019 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B3
Length: 530 words
Byline: DAVID MILSTEAD, Staff
Body


Canada is more susceptible to climate-change risk than many other developed nations, creating risks for investors who buy federal government bonds, according to a leading provider of investment data.
FTSE Russell, a subsidiary of the London Stock Exchange, has created the FTSE Climate RiskAdjusted World Government Bond Index, which weights government debt from 22 developed countries based on what it perceives as the economic risks of climate change in each country.
FTSE Russell says the index allows investors to "engage" with countries on their climate risk, predicting that bond yields of best performers "will decrease as they attract more investors' demand," according to its promotional materials.
An institutional investor using the index to adjust its debt portfolio could sell off debt from countries with greater climate risk and buy more debt from countries with less risk. And that, in turn, could make it easier for a country with less climate risk to issue debt at lower interest rates.
In the initial composition of the climate index, calculated in July, Canada's debt was underweighted by nearly half a percentage point - enough to put it in the top five countries for underweightings, or when a portfolio has less of a stock or bond than a benchmark suggests.
Canada isn't at as much physical risk from climate change as other countries, FTSE Russell estimates. But it ranks near the bottom in what it considers "transition risk" - the challenges in reducing emissions in the long term, as well as "resiliency," a broad set of indicators, including economic and social factors.
It is, says Marina Mets, the managing director of product management at FTSE Russell Canada, "a mixed risk profile."
So far, investors' focus on climate risk has mostly been applied to individual stocks, particularly in the energy sector.
But increasingly, investors are asking all companies to assess and disclose how climate risk applies to them. Extending climate analysis to government bonds is a step further, and one that many investors seem prepared to take.
James Davis, chief investment officer at OPSEU Pension Trust, said it is a natural progression for climate-change risk research to turn to sovereign debt markets.
"Investors are gaining more and more interest in climate change, climate-change risk and understanding it," he said. "The disclosure around it and the transparency around it is going to be essential. Climate-change risk is very much a macro risk. ... I know that interest rates and bond yields are going to be driven by expectations around economic growth and expectations around inflation."
The International Monetary Fund is examining the impact of climate on the world's financial markets and whether it is priced into market valuations, the head of the global lender's markets division told Reuters.
Paul Bowes, head of FTSE Russell Canada, said that in terms of interest in climate change, asset managers and pension funds in Canada are much more active than in the United States.
"In Canada we're more like Europeans - it's a topic in an area that people are desperate to know more about. ... We're getting better engagement here in Canada than in other markets."

Load-Date: October 24, 2019


End of Document




Folio: Climate change; A MATTER OF DEGREES; A growing number of countries at the Paris climate talks are calling for an ambitious target of capping surface temperature rise at 1.5 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels. Tu Thanh Ha reports on the effects different surface temperatures might have and Affan Chowdhry outlines what it will take to mitigate the long-term effects of climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 9, 2015 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 1515 words
Byline: Tu Thanh Ha, Affan Chowdhr
Body


Capping temperatures at two degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels by the end of this century will be a massive global undertaking, according to experts. Even with current emission-cut pledges made by countries in the prelude to the Paris climate talks, the planet is on track to warm by 2.7 degrees, according to the United Nations. Some scientists believe the figure is closer to 3.5 degrees.
Limiting a global rise in temperature to 1.5 degrees would mean dramatic cuts in greenhouse gas emissions, a global shift away from fossil fuels, rapid development of renewable technologies and trillions of dollars of funding to help developing countries meet targets.
Global emissions Michiel Schaeffer, a physicist and climate scientist at the Berlinbased Climate Analytics policy institute, said to meet the twodegree goal, global greenhous gas emissions would need to be cut to zero some time between 2080 and 2090.
In the 1.5-degree scenario, that would need to happen earlier - some time between 2060 and 2080, Dr. Schaeffer explained.
By the middle of this century, countries would have to make significant progress in emissions cuts - between 40 per cent and 70 per cent to reach two degrees and 70 per cent to 95 per cent to reach 1.5 degrees, according to Dr. Schaeffer.
For Canada, hitting a target of 1.5 degrees will mean cutting emissions by one-third over the next decade and achieving zero greenhouse gas emissions over the next 30 to 35 years, according to Ian Bruce, director of science and policy at the David Suzuki Foundation.
On a global level, keeping the planet's temperature rise to less than 1.5 degrees by the end of this century would mean a massive weaning off coal and other fossil fuels that are putting heattrapping gases into the atmosphere.
That will be a challenge in some rapidly developing countries such as India, the world's third-largest emitter, which has plans to build more than 440 coal power plants over the next 15 years.
Dr. Schaeffer said that all existing plans to build coal plants around the world would have to be stopped - and other plants allowed to retire or converted to gas or cleaner energies when their lifespan of 50 years expires.
Renewable energy and carbon capture Keeping the global temperature rise under 1.5 degrees by the end of this century will require a significant increase of renewableenergy technology, such as solar, wind and bioenergy technologies, as countries shift away from fossil fuels.
In Canada, achieving a zeroemissions economy will mean industry using renewable sources of energy and capturing carbon. It will also mean buildings and cars will need to become more efficient.
The David Suzuki Foundation is proposing a 100-per-cent renewable-energy goal by 2050. As an interim goal for 2030, it says Canada should consider the 50/ 50/50 plan being considered by the State of California.
In that scenario, 50 per cent of a country's electricity would come from renewable sources, buildings would use 50 per cent less energy and the fuel used by cars and trucks would be cut 50 per cent.
Mr. Bruce points to examples of progress in Canada, such as the phasing out of coal from Ontario's electricity industry and British Columbia's carbon-tax plan.
"The real lesson there is that the federal government has a vital role and we can do so much more with a unified strategy on climate change," he added.
The focus right now is on the global electricity industry - the cheapest way to reduce emissions and curb global warming, Dr. Schaeffer said.
Reducing emissions in the building and transportation sectors is much more expensive and harder to achieve - and those are the sectors countries will need to look at if they want to go from a two-degree goal to under 1.5 degrees, he said.
Adaptation fund Ambitious global goals on capping temperatures would require developing countries to "leapfrog" fossil fuels and it would mean developed economies providing financial assistance, explained Mr. Bruce of the David Suzuki Foundation. This would need to happen at a time when many of those developing countries are growing quickly and hoping to stay on that rapid economic growth path.
But most of these countries do not have the money or technological know-how to make a rapid transition to a clean-energy economy.
"For a 1.5°C or even 2°C degree [sic] pathway, there is consensus that the annual investments required in the energy sector alone [would] have to grow significantly up to about $1-trillion [U.S.] per year by 2020 and up to about $2-trillion per year by 2030/2035," stated a report called Fair Shares, endorsed by a global coalition of NGOs and civil-society groups. Most of these funds would be needed in developing countries.
Existing global climate-change financing initiatives to help developing economies currently sit at about $15-billion, according to the report.
+1.5 C
Sea levels could rise to submerge land currently home to 27.4 million people in China, 3.6 million people in Bangladesh and 13.4 million people in Vietnam, according to projections by three scientists working for Climate Central, a non-profit organization that reports on climate science. In the United States, the homes of seven million people would be under sea level. In Canada, 540,000 people would be affected.
The median local sea level could rise by 2.9 metres in the Vancouver area, above what are now the homes of 295,000 residents. In the Montreal area, the water level would go up by 2.7 metres, affecting 5,000 people.
The impact would be even worse in large Asian cities: The homes of 4.2 million people in Shanghai, 4.9 million in Hong Kong and 1.2 million people in Hanoi would be under water level.
Climate change is causing species in the temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere to move northward or higher in elevation. At 1.5 degrees C, most trees and herbs would be at moderate risk from falling behind the shifting climate zones, says Hans-Otto Portner, professor in Integrative Ecophysiology at the Alfred-Wegener Institute in Germany.
In the Middle East and North Africa, heat waves could last for two weeks to 80 days, according to the World Bank.
A 6-per-cent to 15-per-cent increase in diarrheal disease in the Middle East and North Africa is predicted. An increase in the incidence of morbidity associated with food and waterborne diseases in Beirut is estimated at 16 per cent to 28 per cent. In South America, a 5-per-cent to 13-per-cent increase in relative risk of diarrheal diseases is forecast. In Mexico, a 12per-cent to 22-per-cent increase in dengue-fever incidence is expected.
+2.0 C
Sea levels could rise to submerge land currently home to 64 million people in China, 12.5 million people in Bangladesh and 25.8 million people in Vietnam, according to projections by three scientists working for Climate Central. In the United States, the homes of 12 million people would be under sea level. In Canada, 737,000 people would be affected.
The median local sea level could rise by 4.7 metres in the Vancouver area, above what are now the homes of 340,000 residents. In the Montreal area, the water level would go up by 4.4 metres, affecting 10,000 people.
The homes of 11.5 million people in Shanghai, 6.8 million in Hong Kong and 3.5 million in Hanoi would be under water level.
Climate-change velocity would become too high for some species to move sufficiently fast and follow their preferred temperatures.
Crop production would be at high risk with some potential for adaptation, Prof. Portner told the UN climate-change conference in Lima in December, 2014.
Heat waves in the Middle East and North Africa could last for three weeks to three months.
In Mexico, a 30-per-cent increase in dengue-fever incidence is predicted.
+4.0 C
Sea levels could rise to submerge land currently home to 144.7 million people in China, 48 million people in Bangladesh and 46.1 million people in Vietnam, according to projections by three scientists working for Climate Central. In the United States, the homes of 24.8 million people would be under sea level. In Canada, one million people would be affected.
The median local sea level could rise by 8.4 metres in the Vancouver area, above what are now the homes of 396,000 residents. In the Montreal area, the water level would go up by 7.4 metres, affecting 54,000 people.
The homes of 22.4 million people in Shanghai, 10 million in Hong Kong and 7.6 million in Hanoi would be under water level.
Climate-change velocity would be much too high for terrestrial and freshwater species to move and relocate.
Crop production would be at high risk. Biodiversity would be lost and the catch potential of fisheries would be highly reduced, Prof. Portner says.
Heat waves in the Middle East and North Africa could last for two months to 200 days.
An increase in the incidence of morbidity associated with food and water-borne diseases in Beirut is estimated at 35 per cent to 42 per cent. In North Africa and the Middle East, 39 million to 62 million more people would be exposed to risk of malaria. However, there would be a decreased length of transmission season for malaria in tropical Latin America.

Load-Date: December 9, 2015


End of Document




University of Alberta official resigns over billboard boasting climate-change benefits
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 1, 2019 Tuesday, British Columbia Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 608 words
Byline: JUSTIN GIOVANNETTI, Staff
Dateline: CALGARY 
Body


The University of Alberta's top official in charge of the school's public image has resigned after approving and defending a billboard advertisement in Edmonton that seemed to tout the benefits of climate change.
The advertisement, released in the middle of a federal election campaign in which climate change is a central issue, says the university's research shows Alberta will grow more barley and increase its cattle industry as the world's climate becomes more unstable. The billboard, and the fury that has grown since it was put up, does not accurately portray the research behind the advertisement, according to the paper's main author.
Monireh Faramarzi said her 2017 paper concluded that producers in southern Alberta might grow more barley in coming decades owing to more rain. However, climate disasters could wipe out larger yields. "We looked at increased or decreased crop yields, such as barley, at different times and different locations in the province under changing climates.
We looked at that question. Our intention was not to conclude on the overall impact of climate change in Alberta or anywhere else," said Dr. Faramarzi, who leads the university laboratory focused on watershed science.
Jacqui Tam, the school's vice-president of university relations, resigned Sunday amid growing concern about the billboard and its message. She said the advertising failed to convey the complexity of Dr. Faramarzi's research and "called the reputation of the University of Alberta and its extensive research on climate change into question."
However, only three days before her resignation, Ms. Tam defended the advertising campaign in an e-mail to the university's staff. "Sparking debate around discoveries and ideas is a key role of universities," she wrote.
The university has said it will remove the advertising by the end of the week. The billboards went up on Sept. 2.
Greg Goss, who was Dr. Faramarzi's supervisor when she wrote the paper, said the point of the research was to help the government and producers adapt to the challenges of climate change. "There's lots of people who on both sides, whether they are climate change deniers or climate change warriors, whatever you want to call them, who completely misrepresent the issues."
Stanford Blade, the dean of the University of Alberta's faculty of agriculture, said in a tweet he could not defend the wording used by the university in the advertising campaign.
Dr. Blade forwarded a request to comment on the issue to the university, which declined to comment on his behalf.
University of Alberta president David Turpin also declined an interview request. In a statement from the university, Dr. Turpin said the decision to pull the advertisement was "a result of the university's acknowledgement that the wording of the ad had resulted in misinterpretation and misunderstanding." His office would not comment on whether he asked Ms. Tam to step down.
Lori Williams, a political scientist at Calgary's Mount Royal University, said the billboard was a big enough blunder to require a resignation. "Her judgment, for someone in charge of the public image of the university, is inexplicable," she said. "It was meant to highlight research from the University of Alberta on how to deal with the challenges farmers and ranchers might face with climate change; what it wound up looking like is that climate change will be a benefit so don't worry about it."
According to Ms. Williams, the billboard also coincides with a federal election in which there's been a view among some Canadians that Albertans don't take climate change seriously enough and care more about the economy and pipelines.

Load-Date: October 1, 2019


End of Document




CHANGE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 17, 2020 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A12
Length: 146 words
Byline: Cathy Orlando
Body


Lead
Re Ottawa Hesitates To Seize Opportunity To Tackle Climate Change (Report on Business, July 14): Columnist Adam Radwanski cites both Germany and Britain, countries that have created new climate policies during the pandemic. What do they have that we don't have here? That would be national climate accountability frameworks.
We almost had such a policy in 2010 with the NDP-led Climate Change Accountability Act (Bill C-311), which passed through the House but was killed by Conservative senators. It would have required that the government set regulations to lower greenhouse gas emissions 25 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020, and set a longterm target of 80 per cent below 1990 levels by 2050. Imagine where we would be today if we had climate accountability laws for the past decade.
Texte/Text
Cathy Orlando International outreach manager, Citizens' Climate Lobby; Sudbury

Load-Date: July 17, 2020


End of Document




OPINION; All of a sudden, Carney is looking prescient; Former bank governor used to be ridiculed for his caution on climate-change costs
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 25, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B4
Length: 879 words
Byline: ERIC REGULY, Staff
Dateline: ROME 
Body


When Mark Carney first mentioned climate and Minsky Moment in the same sentence, he was dismissed by some commentators as a wildeyed alarmist.
His first Minsky reference came in 2015, when Mr. Carney, two years into his job as governor of the Bank of England, launched his campaign to highlight the risks posed to banks, insurers and big companies by radical climate change. His point was that businesses could avoid costly shocks to themselves and their shareholders if they were to identify their climate risks and prepare for them as the world moved to a low-carbon and ultimately zerocarbon future.
The Minsky reference, which he repeated often in speeches and interviews over the years, met with some wonder. What did a Canadian central banker know about climate risks? Didn't talking about climate risk constitute mission creep for a central banker? Shouldn't he be warning about more immediate risks? After all, climate change was a longterm burn. Businesses wouldn't disappear tomorrow because of climate change.
Or would they?
A Minsky Moment happens when asset values collapse with little or no warning. The term was named after Hyman Minsky, the American economist who noted that financial systems can move from apparent stability to mayhem in a very short period of time (the case in point, of course, was the 2007-08 financial crisis, which would come a decade after his death).
The Minsky Moment touted by Mr. Carney took a long time to come. Then - bang! - it did.
In November, 2018, Pacific Gas & Electric, the California utility that was one of the world's biggest electricity companies, had a market value of US$25-billion.
Two months later, its value was US$3-billion. Almost 90 per cent of its value had, so to speak, been incinerated in the California wildfires disaster.
The company was forced to declare Chapter 11 bankruptcy and is unlikely to emerge from legal limbo before the summer.
PG&E's downfall wasn't specifically triggered by climate change. But climate change almost certainly created the conditions - drought, high temperatures, high winds - that turned California's northern forests into a tinderbox. One rogue spark is all it would take to create an inferno.
That's exactly what happened on Nov. 8, 2018, when PG&E's near-century-old Caribou-Palermo transmission line, north of Sacramento, broke, dropping a live wire to the ground. Within minutes, the Camp Fire was raging away and the nearby town of Paradise burnt to the ground.
Some 14,000 houses were destroyed and 85 people were killed, making it the state's deadliest wildfire.
The disaster might have been avoided if PG&E had paid more attention to the climate news.
The company must have known that the endlessly dry conditions in California could turn the forests through which its transmission lines ran into kindling. Indeed, PG&E was well aware that sparks from its aging system were a fire hazard.
According to a Wall Street Journal investigation, the Camp Fire was the 408th fire sparked by its equipment that year, and the 1,961st since mid-2014. It was just a matter of time before one of those sparks ended in tragedy.
Yet PG&E was slow to upgrade its transmission system, spanning almost 30,000 kilometres, and was apparently distracted by its obsession to pay ever-higher dividends and plunge into clean energy. So it handed a Minsky Moment to itself, in effect. A thorough assessment of its climate risks, coupled with a plan to mitigate them, might have cost billions. But it also might have spared a lot of lives and more than US$20-billion of market value.
In an interview with The Globe and Mail in late 2019, Mr. Carney, who was recently appointed as the United Nations special envoy for climate action and finance, said "the market ignores these [Minsky] risks. By the time they do realize them, there is substantial exposure."
Coal companies have not had Minsky Moments, but their valuations have plummeted. Peabody Energy, one of the biggest U.S.
coal producers, has lost 77 per cent of its value in the past year as the dirty fuel takes on pariah status.
Unless they find ways to climate-proof their businesses, they risk seeing their shareholders flee. Enormous funds such as Chris Hohn's TCI Fund Management are starting to make life miserable for climate laggards. Mr. Hohn, a Briton whose fund has US$30-billion of assets, is putting pressure on the companies in his portfolio, including Canadian National and Canadian Pacific railways, to disclose their carbon footprints and bring down their greenhouse gas emissions in a hurry. If they fail, he will vote to send their board directors packing, he says.
Nor is Australia having a Minsky Moment, but vast chunks of the continent are on fire - 14.5 million acres have been scorched since the early fall. The damage to the economy might reach hundreds of billions of dollars, depending on when the fires are snuffed out. But Australia's climate change-skeptic government put virtually no systems in place to prepare for the inevitable fires even as it must have known, as PG&E must have known, that the drought had made the forests highly vulnerable to wildfires.
As Mr. Carney prepares to leave the Bank of England and delve into his UN climate job, the warnings he made a few years ago don't look loony; they look prescient.

Load-Date: June 17, 2020


End of Document




OPINION; Up in the air; This week, the world was issued another dire warning about what will happen if global warming goes unaddressed. So why is good climate policy so hard to love? The answer, like climate change itself, is excruciatingly complex
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 13, 2018 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O1
Length: 4491 words
Byline: CHRIS TURNER
Body


Author whose books include The Geography of Hope: A Tour of the World We Need, The Leap: How to Survive and Thrive in the Sustainable Economy, and The Patch: The People, Pipelines, and Politics of the Oil Sands, which won this year's National Business Book Award
Back in August, environment and energy ministers from across the G7 met in Halifax to discuss cleaner oceans and greener energy. As per the norm in such circles, the proceedings were stiff, technical and wonky as all hell, and so the meetings barely cracked the week's news cycles. There was some coverage of the Canadian government's intentions to join in international efforts to reduce plastic waste and phase out single-use plastic in its own operations. The bigger stories, though, were Environment Minister Catherine McKenna's response to David Suzuki's demand that she resign and Natural Resources Minister Amarjeet Sohi's announcement about the government's next steps to get the Trans Mountain Pipeline built. "Sohi made the announcement in Halifax, where he is hosting G7 energy ministers," a Canadian Press story noted in passing.
The year's political news has been completely dominated by furor over Trans Mountain, of course, and the dismissal of the pipeline's approval by the Federal Court of Appeal was greeted by Indigenous activists and environmentalists as a ringing victory. The political conflict over the pipeline has churned up such a political morass that it's hard to find much in the way of near-term gain for climate change action in the midst of it all. The more likely outcome is that the fragile consensus responsible for Canada's modest efforts to date will be sucked down into that mire for years to come. And so the G7 meeting was a reminder that despite all the calamity, Canada does still have good climate policy in place. Much of it is gathered under the banner of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, the co-ordinated federal-provincial plan stitched together in the spring of 2016 and in constant danger of being torn to shreds ever since. Wonky conferences, such as the one in Halifax, which tend to transpire with little notice and no celebration, are a big part of the daily grinding work of good climate policy.
It was perhaps to be expected, then, that the Framework saw mention in precious few of the breathless news stories covering this week's release of the latest report from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The Framework's incremental initiatives surely seem all out of proportion to the IPCC's stark warning that human civilization has until 2040 at the latest to slash greenhouse gas emissions worldwide if we intend to avoid major climate catastrophe. What did a little good climate policy matter in the face of that?
What I mean by good climate policy, to be clear, is climate policy that has actually been passed, has become the law of the land and has then been sent off to do its quiet work of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. That work tends to be far less noticeable than the screaming headlines above news of imminent disaster or even the final sum on a household energy bill.
British Columbia's carbon tax, for example, is good climate policy. Since the tax was introduced in 2008, gasoline use is down by more than 10 per cent per capita in B.C. and emissions have shrunk by 5 per cent, even as the province's economy has grown steadily. But it remains so inconspicuous that even 10 years after it was enacted, the majority of British Columbians still can't say for sure whether there's a price on carbon-dioxide emissions in their province. That's often the way with good climate policy - when it's working well, you hardly know it's there.
Good climate policy pleases no crowds.
There are no raucous rallies or victory marches in its name. Good climate policy simply doesn't cause too much fuss, satisfying the majority of Canadians who claim to want something done about climate change - something real, measurable, effective - but not so much that it really stings. Good climate policy is like fire insurance or storm drainage - no one wants to think about it, but they want it there to do the job when it's needed. But climate policy is needed now at a scale and scope far beyond any given fire or flood - ultimately, we need it to intervene in every transaction involving fossil fuels everywhere on Earth - and so it is getting harder for good climate policy to stay quietly out of sight. And because no one likes the look of good climate policy in the light of day - because it seems pitifully weak on its face and embarrassing in its concessions and awkward compromises - it is hard to maintain and defend. Mercilessly hard.
Why is good climate policy so hard to love? The answer, like climate change itself, is multivalent and excruciatingly complex, and it has a lot to do with the scale and time frame of the problem and its solutions. No one's climate policies can move fast enough to yield tangible everyday benefits before the next election.
There will be no immediate reward for doing the job well, and rarely does an instant crisis emerge from doing it badly. And in any case, good climate policy satisfies no one completely and makes everyone at least a little uncomfortable. In the foreshortened terms of a bellowed Question Period exchange, the carbon price - any carbon price - is always so high that it will ruin the economy and so low that it will do nothing. Good climate policy is never an easy political win, and even the hard wins seem like losses from many angles. It's a sinkhole for political capital, a kryptonite mine against the superheroic political will required to address climate change's catastrophic scope.
Still, good climate policy is the best we can manage right now - in Canada or anywhere else - and we're in grave danger of squandering what we have in exchange for nothing at all. So it's worth trying to understand how it fails to win much adulation.
Canada has had some good climate policy over the years, although not too much, and it has even more now, though nowhere near enough. But what Canada mostly has, 30 years after Brian Mulroney's Progressive Conservative government convened the world's first major climate conference in Toronto and three years after Justin Trudeau's Liberals came to power hellbent on launching the country's first comprehensive climate-policy package, is an acrimonious stalemate. Carbon pricing has drawn the ire of conservatives across Canada while trading off an oil sands pipeline approval for Conservatives' buy-in on Mr. Trudeau's climate package has environmentalist leftists marching in the streets.
Never mind that the majority of Canadians - 76 per cent, according to an October, 2016, survey by Abacus Data - claim to reside somewhere in between, open to the idea of a new pipeline project alongside more aggressive action on climate change.
They say they want good climate policy, in other words, but they aren't howling for it.
And so they are barely heard. This is how good climate policy fails.
Consider Ontario's coal phase-out - a climate policy so good it verged on great. It did exactly as promised, entirely eliminating coal-burning power plants from the province's electricity grid in barely a decade. The phase-out reduced smog, prevented thousands of premature deaths and created what the Ontario Power Authority justly touts as "the single largest greenhouse gas reduction measure in North America." It is too often remembered now, though, as a prelude to the nasty battle over the province's Green Energy Act, whose clumsy implementation turned neighbour against neighbour in windfarm development battles across rural Ontario, sowed misinformation about the causes of skyrocketing energy bills and helped feed the throw-the-bums-out anger that led to the carbon-price-killing reign of Premier Doug Ford.
And then there's the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, Canada's first real national climate plan, which is the essence of good climate policy. One way to tell it's such good climate policy is because unless you're a policy wonk, you might have never heard its full name until I mentioned it earlier.
This, despite the Framework being easily the most ambitious climate-policy package the country has ever seen, is co-ordinating climate change action between the federal government and every province and territory other than Saskatchewan.
The Framework expands Ontario's coal phase-out nationwide by 2030 and commits all but the Saskatchewanian among us to dozens more changes in how we make and use energy, all to accelerate our pursuit of the greenhouse gas reductions we committed to at the Paris climate summit in 2015. (Fully one-third of those reductions can be achieved if governments nationwide implement only the efficiency measures prescribed by the Framework).
It's accompanied by a national carbon price, which might also be deemed good climate policy if you weren't so much more familiar with it - in a screaming-headlines and Ford-Nation-rallies kind of way - than you likely are with every other detail of the Framework.
We've all heard plenty about the carbon tax, of course. Or, rather, the job-killing carbon tax. Or Mr. Trudeau's reckless carbon tax. Or else the insufficient carbon tax, the window-dressing carbon tax, the carbon tax negated by oil sands expansion.
Such notoriety turns out to be deadly for good climate policy, because a new tax on an environmental problem many people only vaguely understand, levied in order to solve that problem at some indeterminate point in the future, but only after the vast majority of the world's emissions not currently subject to a carbon price are drawn into the fold, turns out not to be a formula for a political slam dunk. Even a report released just a few weeks ago - produced by a think tank headed by a former Conservative policy adviser, no less - showing how most Canadian households will receive more money back in rebates than they will pay in carbon taxes has done nothing to change the tenor of the debate. This was underscored last week when Mr. Ford joined United Conservative Party Leader Jason Kenney in Calgary to rally against carbon taxes - mere days before economist William Nordhaus of Yale University was named a co-recipient of this year's Nobel Prize for economics recognizing his work establishing that implementing a carbon price was the most effective way to fight climate change. In front of a boisterous crowd of more than 1,000, Mr. Ford called Mr. Nordhaus's Nobel-winning idea "the worst tax ever." The rally was a reminder that even as the IPCC was informing the world that nowhere near enough was being done about climate change, Canada already had sufficient climate policy in place to inspire angry rallies against it.
The extraordinary machinations the federal government has undertaken of late to begin work on a pipeline to transport Alberta's bitumen from Edmonton to the Pacific coast represents just the most prominent reason why its good climate policies are finding so few champions. There are myriad other reasons, from the squabbling over jurisdiction endemic to the Canadian federation to the bounteous political hay to be made these days on both the right and left flanks of Mr. Trudeau's Liberals.
Put another way, the fragile coalition needed to keep the Framework in place has, since it was formed, subbed in Mr. Ford and B.C. Premier John Horgan as the custodians of two of its three biggest partners.
You try keeping smiles on everyone's faces at the grip-and-grin after that.
If good climate policy is so likely to lead to such a political mess, what of the other options? These can be categorized broadly as great climate policy and no climate policy.
Let's start with the latter, which is the current position of most Canadian conservative parties. To be fair, conservative politicians have finally been persuaded to pay some grudging bare minimum of lip service to the scientific reality of the situation.
"Virtually everybody accepts that there is such a thing as a man-made contribution to climate change and we have to be prudent in reducing greenhouse gases" - this is Mr. Kenney's rousing rallying cry on the topic.
In practical terms, however, the Canadian right has not presented any comprehensive climate policy package since the federal Conservatives tabled and then abandoned their "Turning the Corner" plan in 2007. The rationalizations for this have ranged from a self-serving sort of realism (think of Stephen Harper explaining that "no country is going to take actions that are going to deliberately destroy jobs and growth") to blithe hand-waving at the coal-spewing power plants of China and dismissive reference to the statistical tables attesting to the fact that Canada remains a small country, population-wise, when you compare it with the whole world. We can't fix the whole problem all by ourselves, so goes the line of reasoning, and many others aren't even trying. So why should we?
Under Andrew Scheer, more than a decade after Mr. Harper's government failed to turn any corners, the new federal Conservative climate policy plan remains top secret. It remains hard to imagine any other policy issue of such consequence on which a viable political party can simply take no substantive position at all. So treacherous is the swamp of climate politics that a shrug from the shore can seem like the least damaging position.
The stronger argument against good climate policy comes from advocates of great climate policy. Great climate policy posits that good climate policy and all its meek, compromised, incremental changes are themselves a big part of the problem. If only a courageous government was willing to take much greater strides, or even an enormous leap - the kind perhaps charted in a multipoint manifesto - well, then we would see the kind of rapid transformation needed not only to forestall climate change, but to build a better society in every respect. We would not only keep all the oil in the ground and slash emissions, we would liberate Canadians through renewable power and decentralized grids. There would be a solar panel on every roof, an electric car in every garage, a bike lane or LRT track on every street. This was the kind of response that this week's alarm-ringing IPCC report was calling for, ideally implemented as of yesterday.
It's a wholly admirable vision. I've spent a great deal of the past 10 years sketching in its contours (and, full disclosure, I was a writer on the Generation Energy report on this theme released by Natural Resources Canada earlier this year). Who wouldn't want to strive for it? But on the question of how to reach it, great climate policy encounters one formidable hurdle: It doesn't exist. Or rather, it doesn't yet exist. It has never been enacted, nor is it built into the platform of any political party with a legitimate near-term shot at forming a government in any major industrial country. This is in part because great climate policy tends to treat politics as an afterthought - which, when you think about it, is an odd way to advocate for a policy package.
What of the many special cases I'm skipping past - the true leaders, some of which I've reported on myself in admiring detail?
Consider Germany, the first major industrial economy to commit in a substantial way to eliminating fossil fuels from its electricity grid - and then set back that project by a generation when Angela Merkel's government shut down the country's nuclear plants instead of its coal-fired ones in order to save its own political hide. What about Norway? Aren't they buying electric cars faster than they can be rolled off production lines? Most definitely - because
those EVs are exempt from a domestic luxury tax that doubles the price of vehicles that burn gasoline. Try selling that to the auto workers of Oshawa and Windsor (not to mention the commuters of Surrey and Laval). And haven't you heard that the great state of California just committed to 100 per cent clean power by 2045? Certainly it did - with an interim goal of 60 per cent by 2030. It's an impressive, pace-setting model for much of the United States.
But if you're wondering about the corresponding Canadian figure, 81 per cent of our electricity nationwide comes from emissions-free sources today. Admittedly, this is down to abundant hydroelectricity more than good climate policy. Still, the point stands: there's not much in the way of great climate policy even in the vanguard.
In place of the molasses-slow muddle of everyday politics, great climate policy calls on the transformative power of science and urgency. As the IPCC reminded us again this week, climate science has made itself abundantly clear about the size and speed at which greenhouse gas emissions must be cut in order to avert climate disaster. Climate policies, then, must deliver those cuts ASAP. This, as great climate policy advocates repeatedly note, is what the science tells us must be done. But as long as elected politicians and not scientists remain in charge of writing the actual legislation, and as long as those same politicians continue to need the support of voters in order to keep doing that work, the science telling us what to do will likely continue to prove as ineffective at making great climate policy a reality as it has to date.
In the face of such intransigence, great climate policy's boosters invoke the mystic power of urgency. There is no time to wait, they say, for the usual machinations of ineffectual government and grinding bureaucracy. This is an emergency. Normal rules don't apply. Over the years - decades, now - the necessary response to climate change has been compared to the Apollo project that put man on the moon, the New Deal that helped end the Great Depression, and, most often, to the command-and-control expediencies of the Second World War. Soon there will come a catalytic moment - most likely one of the growing number of extreme-weather disasters that have already become a hallmark of life in the age of climate change and an obsession among the many advocates of great climate policy I follow on social media - and the blinkers will be lifted from all heretofore unconvinced eyes, the wisdom and necessity of rapid, radical action made manifest and unstoppable.
In the aftermath of such a moment of mass clarity, the revolution will emerge everywhere. It will be guided by a rapid wholesale reinvention of the entire apparatus of modern politics, which will respond to the catalytic catastrophe not with chaos or authoritarian self-preservation, but only with flawlessly orchestrated collective action. This tipping point has been prophesied in green circles for nearly as long as climate change has been a phenomenon on the global political radar, and it does not appear to be much closer at hand today. (The authoritarian self-preservation thing, however, appears to be having its moment.) In the meantime, however, among the mass of people not yet mobilized to fight climate change on the beaches and in the fields and in the streets, that sense of paramount urgency stubbornly refuses to arrive. Something that remains "urgent" for 20 years, after all, is fundamentally not urgent to most people's way of thinking. A wildfire on the edge of town is urgent. A round of layoffs by the big local employer is urgent. A crisis that changes essentially nothing about your daily life for years on end is not urgent. It has proven far easier to inspire a sense of urgency around the use of plastic straws.
There is now even a kind of nostalgia for the fleeting urgency of times past. Nathaniel Rich's epic rundown of the progress and sudden halt of climate policy in the halls of American government in the 1980s, which sprawled across an entire recent issue of The New York Times magazine, is a case in point. Mr. Rich reports in vivid and convincing detail on the sense of urgency that briefly pervaded environmental policy circles in those years, driven by the first strident alarm calls from a range of climate scientists and enlightened public officials.
Mr. Rich's piece is crackerjack historical reporting. But his apparent conclusion, echoed in the white-text headline that is the only splash of light on a black cover - "Thirty years ago, we could have saved the planet" - does not follow at all from the evidence he lays out. That royal "we" elides a broad range of democratic institutions and economic forces that fundamentally did not want rapid change then, and still aren't sure about it now. And this is not just limited to the handful of fossil-fuel companies who have willfully obfuscated the climate change debate. Long-established political systems - and political parties - don't readily embrace rapid change. They aren't built for it, don't understand it and can't manage it very well. Mainstream banks and pension funds don't tend toward rapid change. Industry advocacy groups, chambers of commerce, neighbourhood associations - none of these are designed to drive rapid change. Put another way, try convincing the community association in an established low-rise neighbourhood anywhere in North America that they should readily embrace a 10storey condo development because it will bring welcome and necessary density, enabling greater walkability, affordable transit and even making car-free living a possibility - all crucial urban pieces of any serious long-term response to the climate crisis. Gauge the reaction, and then tell us again how the public in general was ready for a wholesale shift of sufficient scale to combat climate change in 1989 (or 1997 or 2009), but for the media machinations and backroom shenanigans of the oil companies.
Urgency, then, is an expression of solidarity more than a coherent plan. Consider the climate policy efforts to date from a political party that often invokes the urgency of what the science tells us - the NDP.
Starting around 2008 with federal leader Jack Layton, who had been talking a great game about climate change before he took the helm of the party and then threw carbon pricing and everything else in Stephane Dion's Green Shift policy package under a campaign bus to lay the groundwork for finishing second in the 2011 election, the NDP response to climate change has mainly been a kind of strident incoherence. Even as Mr. Horgan thundered against the menace of the Trans Mountain Pipeline this spring, for example, he was also urging the federal government to take action to reduce gasoline prices. (His calls were echoed by Ontario NDP Leader Andrea Horwath on the campaign trail). The B.C. NDP might be steadfast in their opposition to pipelines, but this does not spill over into any kind of policy-oriented hostility toward the consumption of their contents. Mr. Horgan's government even cancelled tolls on the bridges crowded beyond capacity by suburban Vancouver motorists as an additional show of support for the continued reign of the internal-combustion engine.
Wouldn't urgency - real urgency - necessitate working with whatever government currently holds the reins of power, at least insofar as that government is willing to act? Wouldn't a slow start be better than standing still? Wouldn't a binding price on carbon pollution, the end of coal-fired power and a deepening commitment to renewable power and energy efficiency and mass transit from every government in the land - wouldn't all of this right now be worth quite a lot in the way of odd bedfellows and uncomfortable compromises?
This, in any case, was the strategic thinking behind the Pan-Canadian Framework, which presented Canadians with carbon pricing and the rest, all waltzing awkwardly with a pipeline approval. There was Alberta Premier Rachel Notley at her climate plan's launch, photo-opping in a single frame with the executive directors of environmental groups, the chiefs of First Nations and the chief executives of oil companies, all of them united uncomfortably in support of the whole good climate policy package. And what a freakish once-ina-generation moment it was: Canada's largest oil-producing province, without which any united action would be meaningless, stood in solidarity for the first time, possibly ever, with both the Prime Minister and every premier not named Brad Wall on the long-term direction of oil and gas development. This was, if you will, the forging of the Trudeau-Notley consensus - a brief interlude of relative agreement during which just enough momentum might be generated behind good climate policy to make it a fixed feature on the Canadian political landscape. Just maybe enough gears could be sent spinning slowly in the same direction to get the machine moving toward the much more vigorous work that would eventually be necessary to tackle the climate crisis more thoroughly. The trade-off was far from cheap - a pipeline delivering 600,000 additional barrels of Alberta bitumen to the Port of Vancouver - but it was, for the architects of the consensus, the only way to put the whole messy apparatus in motion.
When the Federal Court of Appeals quashed the federal government's approval of the Trans Mountain Pipeline expansion, the First Nations and environmental groups that had fought to stop the project greeted the decision with victorious celebration. I certainly don't begrudge them their exultation - the pipeline came freighted with threats to coastal ecosystems and Indigenous land rights that they simply deemed too much to pay. But I don't see much to celebrate on the climate policy front. The fragile Trudeau-Notley consensus is in shards. Whatever becomes of the pipeline itself, I'd place the smart money on another decade or more lost to its political fallout. The ongoing fight will be mean, and it will feed reactionary politics on all sides, and 10 years from now we might well be no closer to shrinking Canada's carbon footprint for good than we were during that rare interlude of 2016.
It would please me to be wrong. If there is a viable political path from here back to deeper, faster action - to more good climate policy and beyond, all the way to the uncharted territory of the great - I'd love to see it.
The Trudeau-Notley consensus is - was - an ugly deal. It ran roughshod over the land rights of a number of First Nations, amplified the risk of ecological disaster in the Salish Sea and provided a sort of buffer to fossil-fuel industries still reluctant to face twilight head on. But it was the best shot we've ever had at turning the corner decisively on a crisis that counts in decades and centuries. Maybe - just maybe - it could have built a consensus sturdy enough to survive a couple more election cycles and become, like health care or multiculturalism, a permanent fixture. Canada might even have emerged as a sort of model. Now we are in imminent danger of becoming just one more country with no plan at all, going nowhere fast.

Load-Date: October 13, 2018


End of Document




OPINION; Climate change is eroding Inuit society. We are fighting back
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 21, 2019 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A11
Length: 650 words
Byline: NATAN OED
Body


President of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, the national representational organization for Inuit
Storm surges bring the full force of the Arctic Ocean splashing against houses lining the shores of Tuktoyaktuk, in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region of the Northwest Territories.
Across our homeland, Inuit Nunangat, experienced hunters are falling through the ice on routes travelled by Inuit for generations. It's not difficult to see that climate change is affecting our communities and our people in life-altering ways.
In the face of these changes, Inuit are prepared to take action to adapt and remain resilient. Earlier this month in Inuvik, we introduced a National Inuit Climate Change Strategy to help bring about transformative change to address climate risks while also addressing the social and economic inequities we face that are compounded by these risks.
We seek meaningful partnerships as we look to the future and adapt to or mitigate impacts of a changing climate. Objectives contained in the strategy include shaping national climate policies to recognize the diversity of the climate realities in Inuit Nunangat and fostering opportunities for climate solutions that support resilient and sustainable Inuit communities.
Inuit are climate leaders, but we want to do better. Our 51 communities still rely on diesel generation for power. Sustainable energy solutions that are made and implemented in Inuit Nunangat demonstrate our commitment to a low-carbon society alongside Canadian and global commitments.
Climate change is having a particularly profound effect on Inuit health and wellbeing, as witnessed by the mounting pressure to relocate homes because of sea-level rise, coastal erosion and ice conditions whose unpredictability is putting lives at risk.
Such shifts have a ripple effect on our livelihoods, local economies and the learning and development of our youth as our food-sharing networks and our ability to teach our land-based knowledge, skills, values and language are tested.
These activities lie at the core of our cultural identity. Through implementation of the National Inuit Climate Change Strategy, we aim to ensure that climateadaptation policies are informed by Inuitspecific health and wellness considerations.
We are also concerned about our infrastructure. Profound gaps in infrastructure exist throughout Inuit Nunangat, and the limited infrastructure that does exist is being negatively affected by the thawing permafrost and other climate-related concerns.
The strategy seeks partnerships to assess the climate-vulnerability of built and natural infrastructure across Inuit Nunangat and create incentives for resilient new builds and retrofits, as well as to map climate hazards and needs.
Inuit have galvanized awareness globally about the environmental impacts of climate change in our homeland. For those of us experiencing these changes, it means that our way of life is being undermined as well.
Even if global emissions are stabilized at the Paris Agreement goal of limiting temperature increases to less than 2 C above preindustrial levels, our homelands are already locked into the impacts of past and current emissions for at least 30 years.
This means an erosion of our culture and identity alongside the loss of our land, livelihoods and life.
We are connected to Inuit Nunangat. As our climate changes, so does Inuit society.
We will continue to adapt as we have for thousands of years, but we must also do whatever we can to mitigate the damage and prevent future destruction.
We not only want to tell the world about the impacts, through a rights-based lens, we also plan to be leaders in the development of sustainable solutions.
GARY MASON will return We welcome unsolicited articles.
They should be about 650 words, argumentative and include your credentials. If the article is accepted, you'll be notified within three days.
E-mail: comment@globeandmail.com

Load-Date: June 21, 2019


End of Document




Hope matters: Environmental scholar Elin Kelsey's new book aims to shift the narrative on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 26, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: PURSUITS; Pg. P5
Length: 1197 words
Byline: JUDITH PEREIRA
Body


Lead
It's easy to get anxious and depressed when thinking about the overwhelming challenge presented by climate change - and with that can come panic and inertia. That feeling of hopelessness, according to environmental scholar Elin Kelsey, is one of the biggest threats to solving the crisis facing our planet. In her new book, Hope Matters, Kelsey - who began her career studying oceans and marine life - reminds us that while climate change remains a very real menace, it's easy to miss the glimmers of good news amid the drone of doom-filled headlines. And she asserts that hope is not about feeling cheerful: "Anger and hope are not opposites," she says. "They have a symbiotic relationship. Both anger and hope are mobilizing emotions. Hope is what sustains us to keep fighting for social and ecological justice."
Texte/Text
Globe Books talked with Kelsey about how to change the narrative around climate change, where she finds inspiration and the books that have helped shape her world view.
What got you started on this line of thinking - that we need to change the way we think about climate change?
I definitely had an "aha" moment in 2008 about the critical need to shift the narrative beyond doom and gloom. I was leading a series of workshops at the United Nations Environmental Programmes Conference on Children and the Environment in Stavanger, Norway, and I met with children between the ages of 10 and 14, from 92 different countries.
When I asked them what words or feelings came to mind when they thought about the environment, I was overwhelmed by their expressions of fear, anger and despair. The focus on a solutions orientation evolved more gradually.
Some key influences include meeting with Bill Laurance in 2011 when I was a fellow at the Cairns Institute in Australia. Bill created a program called ALERT that mobilizes scientists to respond to critical conservation issues and media stories as they're unfolding. His focus on mobilizing expert knowledge in real-world, real-time contexts was pivotal to helping me see the difference between problem identification and solutions generation. I also spent time with Patrick Meier in 2013, a leader in digital humanitarianism, at the Rockefeller Bellagio Center. I began to recognize the opportunities that might emerge if I could crowdsource environmental successes and solutions.
This led to #OceanOptimism, which I co-created with Heather Koldewey of the Zoological Society of London and Nancy Knowlton of the Smithsonian. The tag was launched on Twitter in 2014 and has reached more than 100 million shares.
How do you ensure this message of hope isn't somehow used as a way to not do anything?
There is a fear among activists that politicians and others may not want to move on something if they hear that that, for example, the South Atlantic humpback whales have jumped from 440 in the late 1950s to around 25,000 now. Or that the Monterey Bay in California is now healthier than it's been in 200 years. But these stories show the resiliency of ecosystems and the diversity we have on this planet, and we should be using that to show that it's not all "the end of the world." We can make a difference. We can change.
The news story is always that we didn't reach the global deforestation goal of 50 per cent, but you don't hear that we actually made it to 30 per cent. Sure, that means we have work to do, but we need to realize it's not a blanket horror show.
When did you start working on this book?
I've been developing the major ideas and themes within the book for more than a decade. I went through a convoluted series of rewrites on a proposal for a book about hope about five years ago, with a major agent at a literary agency. When she eventually lost interest in the project, I put it on hold and continued to research, give keynotes, and to work with students and other academics. In the winter of 2018, I spent a month in Finland as a writer-in-residence at the Arteles Creative Center. Instead of taking all my various drafts of the proposal with me, I gave myself the freedom to write whatever I felt like. To my surprise, I found myself waking up in the middle of the night with fully formed poems in my head. I left Finland with almost 100 poems and a sense that even if I never got my non-fiction book published, I had said what I wanted so badly to say about hope. Less than a year later, I picked up one of the drafts of the book proposal, reworked it to say what I wanted to say (rather than trying to please an agent) and sent it off to Greystone Books.
Each chapter of Hope Matters begins with a poem that emerged during that breakthrough time in Finland.
Could you take me through what a typical writing day is like?
When I was writing Hope Matters, I relied on a trick I had taught myself while writing my PhD thesis.
I'd get up before dawn, take a shower and write as long as I could. When I started to get tired, I'd take another shower and change my clothes as if I was just beginning the day again. It's amazing how helpful a "whole new day" can be when you have too much to write in the time you have available.
Whether I'm writing to a supertight deadline or just developing ideas, I write almost entirely outside. I'm lucky to have a covered deck where I can tuck in out of the rain. I also love to hunker down in big coats on windy days on one of the wooden chairs that someone has kindly placed on a rock by the edge of the ocean in Victoria. Writing outside keeps me connected to the environment. Because my work is informed by first-person interviews with scientists, and because I focus on emerging trends and specific contexts, I have an insatiable hunger for time-stamped content and gathering ideas that are new to me from across many disciplines.
What books have inspired you, and what would you recommend to readers? I am a big believer in using big data sets to identify important trends and to challenge our existing assumptions. A brilliant example of why this is so valuable is shown in Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong About the World - And Why Things Are Better Than You Think by Hans Rosling, with Ola Rosling and Anna Rosling Ronnlund. I'm also inspired by writers who challenge dominant narratives and help us to see other species - and their capacities of agency and resilience - from new perspectives and diverse world views. Three favourites are Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge and the Teachings of Plants by Robin Wall Kimmerer; Darwin Comes to Town: How the Urban Jungle Drives Evolution by Menno Schilthuisen; and Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are? by Frans de Waal.
I personally believe in hopeful futures, but for those who may be experiencing trouble doing so, I have found the palliative care literature rich in terms of reconceptualizing hope in terms of a meaningful present - for example, Joan Halifax's Standing at the Edge: Finding Freedom Where Fear and Courage Meet. I appreciate writers who reveal embedded narratives that keep us in the status quo. Kelly McGonigal turns our assumptions about stress, for instance, upside down in The Upside of Stress: Why Stress is Good for You and How to Get Good at it.

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document




Making waves: Canadians take to streets calling for action on climate change; From Montreal to Vancouver, Calgary to Inuvik, young people across Canada came out in droves on Friday to show how serious they are about turning climate change around
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 28, 2019 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 796 words
Byline: LES PERREAUX, Staff
Dateline: MONTREAL 
Body


Waves of Canadians led by global climate change fighter Greta Thunberg marched the country's streets Friday to demand leaders take action to put a halt to rising temperatures.
Large crowds filled the avenues in Toronto, Vancouver and Ottawa while smaller boisterous crowds gathered in at least 85 other communities from Victoria to St. John's to Inuvik.
The demonstrations capped off a week in which millions of children and young people took to the streets around the world and Ms. Thunberg drew the ire of Donald Trump with her angry speech to the United Nations, denouncing the inaction of world leaders such as the U.S. President.
In Montreal, Indigenous teenagers and Ms.Thunberg arrived about 20 minutes before the last stragglers left the starting point of the city's walk.
Marchers spilled into side streets along the planned route, taking over much of the downtown.
The 4.4-kilometre continuous stream of humanity defied precise counting, but the city's emergency services estimated 315,000 people were there.
"You should be proud of yourselves, we have done this together," Ms. Thunberg told the massive crowd. "Millions of people are marching around the world. It's incredible to be united in such a way."
Ms. Thunberg took the stage to call on leaders to take action before global heating can no longer be restrained.
"You are not in school today. You are not at work today because this is an emergency," she told the crowd. "We will not be bystanders."
Her message resonated among the climate strikers.
"We need to find a more respectful way of living," said Jessica Lacroix, a student who marched in Montreal but hails from the Cree community of Nemiscau near James Bay in Northern Quebec. "Up North we have some serious problems with the environment. With mining, the water is getting contaminated, the land is getting contaminated.
We can't go on this way."
In Halifax, Julia Sampson was among 10,000 people who walked through the streets to protest the absence of strong climate change measures amid rising sea levels and grim flood forecasts for her city.
"The climate crisis is threatening my future, and I want to live," said the highschool student. In Vancouver, a preschooler carried a sign: "This cannot wait until I am bigger."
The network of students and activists who organized the march issued demands: transition to renewable energy, legally enshrine the right to a healthy environment, adopt the UN declaration on Indigenous rights and protect the poor from climate change.
Montreal organizer Cedric Gray-Lehoux, an Indigenous youth representative, said politicians such as Justin Trudeau and Jagmeet Singh who showed up at climate marches will be expected to deliver plans to meet greenhouse gas emission targets.
"We will be here waiting to see if you deliver, whether you like it or not," he said.
The Liberal Leader joined the Montreal march for a short time as he campaigned for re-election Oct. 21.
The reception was hostile as protesters marched near him yelling "No pipeline" and heckled him for his history of wearing brownface and blackface before he entered politics. Mr. Trudeau's security detail wrestled to the ground one man who approached the Prime Minister in one of the only incidents on a peaceful day. Mr. Trudeau put his arm around his son, Xavier, who was visibly upset by the encounter.
Earlier, Mr. Trudeau met Ms. Thunberg for 15 minutes before she convened with Montreal environmental movement leaders. Ms. Thunberg scolded Mr. Trudeau on social media in June for approving the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion, but she was more conciliatory in the meeting, saying climate change is the responsibility of more than one leader. But during her speech, she made it clear she views Canada as a laggard. She noted both Canada and her homeland of Sweden have an image as climate leaders.
"In both cases, it means nothing," she said. "In both cases, it's just empty words."
Mr. Singh, the NDP Leader, attended a climate protest in Victoria while Conservative Leader Andrew Scheer opted to stay away from the climate strike, making an infrastructure announcement in Coquitlam, B.C., instead.
Many signs at the protests noted his absence and criticized his climate change plan. "Denying climate change is Scheer lunacy," one in Toronto said.
While politicians faced some ire, the atmosphere in the marches from coast to coast was festive and orderly. Montreal has a litter problem at the cleanest of times, but the protesters made their route spotless, picking up trash.
Many parents brought very young children who wore face paint and carried signs.
"I tell them the importance of getting involved, of taking care of our planet, our community," said Stéphanie Hétu, who was flanked by her children, Alice, 5, and Loïc, 8.
With reports from The Canadian Press

Load-Date: September 28, 2019


End of Document




THE WEEK; Climate-change consensus is reached everywhere except in Washington
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 24, 2015 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A2
Length: 877 words
Byline: ELIZAETH RENZETTI
Body


erenzetti@globeandmail.com
At times, I feel like I should cancel my Netflix subscription and just watch the debates on the floor of the U.S. Senate, instead. My need for comedy would be satisfied, as well as horror and the supernatural. I'd be learning something, too.
This week, I'd have learned that climate change, contrary to the conclusion of thousands of studies conducted by thousands of scientists, is not in fact caused by human behaviour. How do we know this? To quote the hymn, because the Bible tells us so.
Oklahoma Senator James Inhofe, author of the ambiguously titled 2012 book The Greatest Hoax: How the Global Warming Conspiracy Threatens Your Future, rose to denounce the idea that any hand but God's had messed the bed in which we now lie: "Climate is changing, and climate has always changed. There's archeological evidence of that.
There's biblical evidence of that. There's historic evidence of that. The hoax is that there are some people who are so arrogant to think that they are so powerful they can change climate. Man can't change climate."
The Republican Senator didn't say what, precisely, was causing climate change. Cow farts? The beating of a million angels' wings? The dying sighs of all those taxpayers whose rights are being trampled by the pinko President? Before you dismiss Mr. Inhofe's beliefs as the ravings of a fringe crank, consider that he is the chair of the Senate's environment and public works subcommittee. Or, as you might like to think of it, Torquemada in charge of the human-rights tribunal.
As the Senate continues to debate the Keystone XL pipeline bill, Democrats introduced two symbolic motions intended to embarrass their Republican counterparts. The first simply argued that "climate change is real, and not a hoax." It passed, by a vote of 98 to 1. But the other measure, which far more crucially linked human activity to climate change and thus might have inspired action, failed to reach the 60-vote threshold needed to pass.
(A third Republican-sponsored amendment also failed.)
This is less like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic than looking over the railing and debating whether the giant white thing is an iceberg or a marshmallow. The consensus has been reached, gentlemen, everywhere but in Washington. Even the plutocrats at Davos are sweating through their Zegna suits: The World Economic Forum spent a day debating climate change and its disruptive effects, and listed climate-related chaos among the greatest threats facing the planet.
Over at the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, the Doomsday Clock has just been moved ahead to three minutes to midnight, largely because of a threat that remains unaddressed at the highest levels.
I hear what you're saying: Canada has oil on its hands, too. We've been shamefully derelict in addressing our contribution to the planet's emissions. But the shenanigans at the Senate this week showed just how far in denial powerful American interests are - less eagle, more ostrich.
It's not just Mr. Inhofe, who for years has refuted any cause but the divine in changing temperatures, and now promises as chair of the environment committee to introduce challenges to those scientists and their pesky consensus: "We'll be there to be the truth squad," he told the Senate on Wednesday.
He'll have help from other high-profile Republican climate deniers who have been placed in positions of power (like foxes in charge of the hen house, as Slate's Phil Plait put it.) Senator Ted Cruz now heads the committee that oversees NASA, and has promised that the space agency will be directed away from "political distractions" such as gathering data on climate, and toward its other mandate of finding out what's on Mars. Presumably so that once this planet is used up, there will be another to wipe our feet on.
Senator Marco Rubio, who said last year "I do not believe that human activity is causing these dramatic changes to our climate the way these scientists are portraying it," is chair of the committee overseeing the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAA and NASA just made the joint announcement that 2014 was the hottest year on record, and that 14 of the 15 warmest years have occurred since 2000.
What role will the Senate's climate deniers play in shaping these two agencies? Last year, as the Washington Post's Josh Hicks reported, "the Republican-controlled House passed a bill that would have required NOAA to dedicate more money on weather-forecasting than climatechange studies."
Senators Cruz and Rubio both voted against the measure linking climate change to human activity. No one seemed surprised. There was little outcry over the chair of the Senate environment committee using the Bible to refute the findings of scientists, many of whom work for his own government. The shenanigans in the Senate hardly raised a stir in a week when our southern neighbours were obsessed with the size of football players' balls.
The President is paying attention, obviously. "I will not let this Congress endanger the health of our children by turning back the clock on our efforts," Barack Obama said during his State of the Union address. But how much can he accomplish in the time left? It's a fight now between the lame duck and the ostriches.

Load-Date: January 24, 2015


End of Document




OPINION; Nuclear power is the key to fighting climate change. So why don't we embrace it?; Given that three countries that have largely decarbonized all relied on nuclear power, one might think it would be central to any discussion of how to fight climate change. But one would be very wrong
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 22, 2019 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O8
Length: 823 words
Byline: DAN GARDNER
Body


Author of Risk: The Science and Politics of Fear and a principal at Tactix, an Ottawa consultancy
One in three Canadians thinks nuclear power emits as much carbon dioxide as burning oil. Almost three in 10 think it emits more.
There are several reasons to marvel at these facts, which were uncovered by Abacus Data earlier this year. First, they're spectacularly wrong. After construction, nuclear power is effectively zeroemission electricity, while oil is one of the leading causes of climate change. Second, the fight against climate change is about replacing fossil fuels such as oil with the short list of zero-emission energy sources. And yet, it seems most Canadians don't know what's on the list.
But what's most disheartening is that these are Canadians, of all people. Three countries have massively decarbonized with the help of nuclear power. France and Sweden are the first two. The third - and apparently this will be news to most Canadians - is Canada.
"France replaced almost all of its fossil-fuelled electricity with nuclear power nationwide in just 15 years; Sweden, in about 20 years," an op-ed in The New York Times recently noted. Both these revolutions were prompted by the energy crises of the 1970s, long before anyone worried about climate change, but they made France and Sweden climatechange leaders, however accidentally. Today in France, 6 per cent of electricity is generated by fossil fuels. In Sweden, it's 1 per cent. If every country were to combine numbers such as that with sweeping electrification - farewell, internal-combustion engine - humanity would be well on its way to beating climate change.
But other countries are nowhere near where France and Sweden are. In the United States, 67 per cent of electricity comes from fossil fuels. Even in Germany, where massive subsidies have been lavished on solar and wind generation, 55 per cent of electricity comes from fossil fuels, and carbon emissions have remained flat.
And Canada? About one-fifth of our electricity comes from fossil fuels. That's not in the same league as France and Sweden, but we can still boast that our electricity is far cleaner than most. Wind and solar power get all the attention, but the credit does not go to them. It's hydro-electric power we have to thank. And nuclear power.
Aside from one reactor in New Brunswick, all of Canada's nuclear power is generated in Ontario.
About 61 per cent of the province's electricity comes from the splitting of atoms, not far behind the 77 per cent of France's total electricity generated by nuclear power. But those bare numbers don't tell the full story.
In 2003, Ontario's government made the historic decision to fight both climate change and local air pollution by phasing out coalfired generators. It was a huge challenge. Coal generated onequarter of the province's electricity. But by 2014, coal was gone.
So what replaced it? Generously subsidized and much-discussed solar and wind power covered about 7 of coal's 25 percentage points. The remaining 18 percentage points were replaced by unloved, seldom-mentioned nuclear power.
Today, Ontario's electricity is among the cleanest in the world.
Given that the three most successful decarbonizations in history heavily relied on nuclear power, one might think nuclear would be central to any discussion of how to fight climate change by decarbonizing. But one would be very wrong.
In Ottawa a few months ago, Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency (IEA), said that in all his travels and discussions with top officials "the word 'nuclear' almost never comes up." Canada is no different.
Justin Trudeau and his ministers talk endlessly about climate change, but "nuclear" seldom slips past their lips.
A few weeks ago, the IEA released a report revealing just how critical nuclear power is to the fight against climate change.
If the electricity generated by nuclear power between 1971 and 2018 had instead come from the burning of fossil fuels, humanity would have emitted an additional 63 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide.
To put that in perspective, all the burning of fossil fuels in the world in 2018 emitted 33.5 gigatonnes.
"Without nuclear power," the report says, "emissions from electricity generation would have been 25 per cent higher in Japan, 45 per cent higher in Korea, and over 50 per cent higher in Canada."
But humanity is not building on this success. Few nuclear plants are being built, existing stock is aging, and some countries, notably Germany, are actually phasing out nuclear plants early.
The IEA analyzed what will happen if current trends persist.
Short summary: The planet will cook.
"Without action to provide more support for nuclear power," Mr. Birol wrote, "global efforts to transition to a cleaner energy system will become drastically harder and more costly."
Mr. Birol is an economist who favours bureaucratic understatement. When he uses a word such as "drastically," pay attention.

Load-Date: June 22, 2019


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; The challenge of making climate change a hot-button issue in U.S.
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 30, 2015 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1322 words
Byline: OMAR EL AKKAD
Dateline: PORTLAND, ORE. 
Body


THE YEAR IN THE WORLD
The Globe's reporters reflect on the international stories that moved them and changed us I n a country founded on the pioneer mythology of the people taming the land, it's difficult to imagine a future defined by the exact opposite.
In April of this year, I drove with a local environmental activist to the outskirt towns that border Miami. He wanted to show me a gated community near the Atlantic coast. We parked behind one of the easternmost villas. Quietly, he walked to the back of the home and pointed to the fence that marked the property line. Not far from the fence, the waterline rested - another metre or so and it would consume the fence, and perhaps the houses that lay behind it.
Just a few months earlier, oblivious to the seriousness of the problem, the activist who showed me this place had purchased one of these houses. The rising sea - and the community's unwillingness to deal with it - now threatened the place he called home.
Climate change still represents the most serious existential crisis in the United States. In California, an unprecedented four-year drought threatens the country's most important agricultural hub.
In Louisiana, a century of levees and heavy industry is driving coastal land loss to the tune of a football field's worth of land every 45 minutes. And in places such as South Florida, residents and politicians are having a harder and harder time ignoring the possibility that, in a century or less, entire towns and cities may no longer be habitable.
By all these measures, climate change should have been the single most heavily covered story in the United States this year.
But it wasn't.
Amidst a wide array of national crises, the prospect of environmental ruin often proves simply too abstract, the consequences too distant, the reality too easy to ignore.
Slow-burning dangers Part of the problem is perspective. Even as it threatens the very existence of some of the country's most iconic cities - Miami and New Orleans, La., among them - climate change often seems to lack the immediate urgency of other social ills in the United States. Issues of violence and racial inequity provide no shortage of visceral moments - the killing of an unarmed African-American, the chaotic aftermath of a mass shooting. But beyond cracked lake beds and snowless mountain caps, climate change offers no such imagery.
Instead, the worst environmental crises will play out over decades - far too slow-burning in a political environment that rarely concerns itself with anything beyond the date of the next election.
That's why so few climate scientists studying places such as Miami are optimistic about the pace and adequacy of planning in these cities. Should sea levels rise two metres in the next hundred years - near the top end of current projections - much of South Florida's infrastructure will collapse. That, in turn, will spur a massive northward migration - an economic, cultural and human upheaval.
But there exists no short-term political or financial incentive to do anything about it. The lifespan of the average mortgage is 30 years, the lifespan of an average political career about the same. Imposing economic pain today - in the form of increased taxes, expensive research or more stringent environmental regulations, to say nothing of modifications to major infrastructure - in order to prepare for a crisis outside that 30-year time frame is no way to win an election.
Instead, whatever happens in many coastal regions will likely come as a series of shocks: the day the risk of rising water forces credit-rating firms to cut a city's or state's outlook, or the day insurance companies finally decide all those beautiful beachfront homes aren't worth the risk.
Optimists, nonetheless, will find at least some reason to rejoice. After all, 2015 marked a watershed moment in the global movement to fight climate change. As the year came to a close, 195 countries signed on to the Paris climate agreement. The historic document contains myriad pledges aimed at controlling carbon emissions and keeping the planet's average temperature in check. It is, in many ways, an audacious plan, one whose actual price tag is never definitively specified, but could run to $100-billion (U.S.) or more a year.
But it's what comes next that matters. In the world of environmental protection, it is often the case that the most well-covered agreements and photo-ops involve world leaders, but the most innovative and significant work is done on a much smaller scale - by individual states, cities and by local activists. And much of that work, at least in the United States, has been driven not by some grand, forward-looking vision, but by a growing sense of panic.
Long-term plans In the spring of this year, with virtually the entire state suffering from a prolonged drought, California imposed a sweeping order to cut urban water usage by 25 per cent. In the small town of South Miami, Fla., one of the most susceptible places to rising sea levels in the country, Mayor Philip Stoddard is one of the very few politicians willing to talk about what an orderly migration in the coming decades should look like.
It is precisely that issue - how to begin planning for the vastly complex prospect of permanent, long-term adaptions to climate change - that will mark the most important chapter of the country's climate-change story. Unlike the residents of so many of the world's barrier islands, the people living on the U.S. coastlands have far more resources to enable them to plan and to move.
Already, in many corners of the country, signs of such minimigrations are evident. Some California almond farmers, plagued for years by drought, are starting to trickle northward into Oregon.
But the question remains: What happens when those who can't easily afford to move are forced into movement? What happens when the trickle turns into a flood?
A partial answer, at least, will be found in the inevitable oneoff shocks that come between now and whenever the seas rise enough to force permanent relocation. There will be bigger hurricanes, wilder wildfires - and in the aftermath of each, there will be clues as to which parts of the country are still worth trying to save. In southern Louisiana, for example, the state is building several levees to brace for the next Katrina. But they are not building them at the current water's edge. Rather, the levees are being constructed further north, designed to protect the higher ground upstate. Whatever infrastructure already exists south of those levees is essentially, in the long run, a sunk cost.
In the meantime, there's little reason to believe climate change will feature any more prominently in U.S. public discourse next year than it did in 2015. As the country heads into the thick of a deeply polarized presidential election - one in which many of the candidates reject the notion of human-driven climate change altogether - the national news agenda promises to be even more crowded. And while some candidates will undoubtedly present thorough environmental policies, few will see any upside to tackling the prospect that, in a few decades, some parts of this country may no longer be livable.
Near Miami, they're building a wall. It's about one-metre high, an ocean beach ahead of it and a string of expensive houses behind it. It's designed, at least in theory, to reduce damage to the nearby streets and infrastructure the next time a big hurricane comes through.
As a public-works project, it's wildly expensive - about $10million a mile. But it represents at least, a single concrete solution to a single concrete problem: A wall to hold back a hurricane.
Anything more than that, anything that requires a fundamental rethinking of whether places such as South Florida can continue to support large-scale residential life in an era of warming seas and changing climate, is a far tougher sell.
Omar El Akkad reports from Portland, Ore.

Load-Date: December 30, 2015


End of Document




OPINION; Australia portends a fiery future for Canada's West; We need only look Down Under to see the effects of climate change - the question is, what are we doing about it?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 11, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 812 words
Byline: GLENN MCGILLIVRAY
Body


Managing director, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction W hen we look at the current fire situation playing out in Australia, where a prolonged period of exceptionally hot, dry weather has contributed to four straight months of major wildfires (called bushfires Down Under), a question is rekindled: Does the situation there portend a hotter, dryer, more fiery future for places such as British Columbia and Alberta?
A decade or more ago, the question would come up quite regularly: With changing fire seasons being projected for places such as Australia and the United States, will changes eventually migrate north and take root in Canada's west?
The answer to the question now appears to be a fairly resounding "yes."
According to Canada's Changing Climate Report, a major assessment of current and future climate change impacts issued by Environment and Climate Change Canada last year: "Temperature has increased in all regions of Canada and in the surrounding oceans. Since 1948, when countrywide records became available, Canada's annual average temperature over land has warmed by a best estimate of 1.7 C, with higher temperature increases observed in the North, the Prairies and northern British Columbia. Annual average temperature over northern Canada increased by 2.3 C since 1948. The greatest warming has occurred in winter."
Although this sounds dire, Canada - indeed the world - is really only in the early stages of warming. But to put it in the simplest terms possible, we ain't seen nothing yet.
As temperatures climb, there will be knock-on effects on precipitation and occurrences of drought, instances of prolonged heatwaves and negative effects on forest health owing to such things as insect infestation, to name but a few.
This being said, we will continue to see a considerable amount of natural variability in our weather, at least for the next decade or so.
This will mean that the typical fluctuations that have been inherent in fire seasons in places such as B.C. will largely continue for the near term. That is, there will still be relatively mild fire seasons in some years, interspersed with more severe seasons in others.
In time, however, the bad years will come more often. This is what climate change does - it loads the dice toward more and greater extremes. In the meantime, not so subtle hints of what the future will bring will show themselves here and there, as was the case with the 2017 and 2018 B.C. wildfire seasons.
The 2017 fire season in B.C.
was, up to that time, the worst ever recorded in the province, with 1,353 fires reported (the 10 year annual average is 1,666) and a total area burned of 1,216,053 hectares (the 10 year annual average is 269,702 hectares, about 4.5-times lower than what was experienced in 2017).
But then came 2018. That year, 2,117 fires (451 more than the 10 year annual average) burned 1,354,284 hectares, an all-time record.
To have two extreme fire seasons run back-to-back is quite exceptional, but this is the kind of thing that climate change will bring. Fire seasons that may begin earlier in spring than in the past; bigger, hotter, faster-moving fires; larger areas burned; fire seasons that may extend later in the fall; less natural variability with more climate forcing.
Some of these are only now just rearing their ugly heads in Canada's west, but changes in the U.S. west have been evident for some time. There, the annual average number of large fires (i.e.
greater than 1,000 acres or 405 hectares) has gone from around 140 in the 1980-89 period to around 250 in the 2000-2012 period. Fire seasons have been starting roughly a week earlier for each decade, from average fivemonth seasons in the early 1970s to seven-plus-month seasons today. Some fire experts have mused that places such as California may even be moving to 12month seasons.
A study published in the journal Earth's Future in December, 2018, looked at the role climate change played in the 2017 wildfire season in British Columbia.
The research found that the risk factors affecting the event, and the area burned itself, were made substantially more likely by climate change.
"We show over 95 per cent of the probability for the observed maximum temperature anomalies is due to anthropogenic [human-caused] factors, that the event's high fire weather/behaviour metrics were made 2-4 times more likely, and that anthropogenic climate change increased the area burned by a factor of 7-11."
The fire situation in Canada (and in B.C. and Alberta, in particular) is almost certain to only get worse. Research has found that the area burned in Canada has roughly doubled since the 1970s, and is projected to double again (and possibly treble) by the end of this century.
We know what is coming down the pipe - and it is not good. So the questions are: What are we doing about it? Where's the plan? Or do we simply just sit and wait?

Load-Date: June 17, 2020


End of Document




IN AFRICA: NOT GUILTY, BUT PAYING THE PRICE; CLIMATE TALKS ARE THROWN OFF COURSE as a document that sidesteps Kyoto widens the divide between rich and poor countries at Copenhagen. This rift is a reality for Africans, who contribute the least to pollution yet are destined to be the hardest hit by climate change. The summit is placing huge emphasis on 'adaptation' for these nations, but the mood of co-operation is souring
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 9, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; CLIMATE CHANGE / THE COPENHAGEN SUMMIT; Pg. A1
Length: 1244 words
Byline: GEOFFREY YORK
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG 
Body


 It's one of the most painful ironies of climate change. Africans are the world's poorest people and have contributed the least to industrial pollution, yet they face the greatest suffering from the changing climate. 
 While sub-Saharan Africa contains 12 per cent of the world's population, it is responsible for just 2 per cent of greenhouse gases. Africa produces only 1/20th as much carbon dioxide as the United States on a per-capita basis, yet it is the world's most vulnerable region. As the planet warms, droughts, floods and food shortages are likely to ravage the land with increasing frequency. 
 Studies suggest an additional 250 million Africans will be affected by water scarcity by 2025. Malnutrition will rise and armed conflicts will increase as Africans fight over scarce food. And an additional 90 million Africans will be exposed to malaria by 2030. 
 That's why the Copenhagen conference is placing a huge emphasis on "adaptation" - financing from wealthy countries to help the poorest adapt to drought, erratic rainfall and rising sea levels. Sources say Ottawa is already drafting a short list of African countries to receive Canadian funds to help them adapt. However, the process of adaptation in Africa is already under way. 
Predicting the spread of malaria
 On the snowcapped slopes of Mount Kenya, as in other African highlands, malaria was unknown in the past. But as the climate warms up, the snow has disappeared from the mountains - and malaria-carrying mosquitoes have moved up Mount Kenya and into other high-altitude regions, putting millions of people at risk. 
 Temperature data is "the most revealing and compelling" indicator of the spread of malaria in the highlands, Kenyan researcher Andrew Githeko found. He discovered that a 0.5-degree increase in average temperatures since the 1970s has led to an eightfold increase in malaria cases in western Kenya. Similar links between malaria and climate change have been found in Tanzania, Uganda and Ethiopia. 
 A new project, with help from Canada's International Development Research Centre, is trying to refine weather data to predict malaria. Researchers have developed a prediction model that can detect an epidemic up to four months in advance. They collected malaria data from a dozen East African hospitals and matched it against local climate records, allowing predictions to be made. 
 Under the latest three-year project, with a $245,000 contribution from Canada, the researchers will develop a detailed map of existing malaria zones and new zones, improving their predictive ability. They will train health-care workers to prevent expected outbreaks by distributing mosquito nets and spraying mosquito breeding grounds. 
How to avoid the $100 chocolate bar 
 Almost three-quarters of the world's cocoa is produced in West Africa. Yet the changing climate has become a serious threat to cocoa farmers. In Ghana, the land area where cocoa can be grown has shrunk by 40 per cent since the 1960s. Climate change is jeopardizing cocoa by causing more disease, more bushfires, declining soil fertility and a shorter lifespan for cocoa trees. 
 One expert, John Mason of the Nature Conservation Research Centre in Ghana, predicts the decline in cocoa- growing land will fuel a sharp rise in global prices. A chocolate bar could cost as much as $100 within 20 years, he says. 
 Yet cocoa itself is contributing to climate change, since many farmers are chopping down the canopy of trees that gives shade to cocoa. Farmers traditionally believed that cocoa grows better in direct sunlight. But with climate change, they are finding that the sun is too harsh on their crops. 
 Mr. Mason and another Ghana-based environmentalist, Rebecca Asare, are working on schemes to encourage cocoa farmers to preserve their trees or plant new ones. They are hoping to tap into the carbon credits offered under new international agreements to those who preserve forests. 
How elephant dung can save the planet
 Africa's vast forests are a crucial source of help for the global climate, pulling millions of tonnes of carbon out of the atmosphere every year. But rapid deforestation is a major contributor to atmospheric greenhouse gases. And Africa is losing its forests at twice the pace of the rest of the world, with a third of its forests already destroyed. 
 Because of poverty, 80 per cent of Africans rely on wood or charcoal for their household fuel. 
 In Tanzania alone, about 3,300 square kilometres of forest is being chopped down every year to produce charcoal. Uganda has lost half of its forest cover in the past 30 years, much of it for charcoal. 
 Innovative small-scale projects in East Africa are replacing charcoal and firewood with fuel briquettes produced from sawdust, waste paper, corn cobs, banana skins - even cow and elephant dung. 
 One project, led by Cheryl Mvula, has trained 200 women in five Kenyan villages to make briquettes from dried cow dung and other waste material, using low-cost presses. 
 Since the project began in March, the villages have reduced their firewood collection by 75 per cent. 
 They are also selling briquettes to safari lodges, replacing the traditional charcoal fuel. 
 The project will expand to five more Kenyan villages next year and has also been introduced in Zambia. "It's been more successful than I expected," Ms. Mvula said. 
Too little rain - and too much
 The farmers of the Western Cape are crucial to the South African wine- and fruit-export industries, employing more than 200,000 workers. But the farmers have been buffeted by climate change, beginning with a series of painful droughts from 2000 to 2005. Since then, the rain has been erratic. 
 Unusual deluges, with up to 200 millimetres of rainfall in a single night, have wreaked havoc in the orchards and vineyards. 
 Andre Thops, who grows olives and grapes, says he had to stop growing tomatoes because of unpredictable rains. He covers his vineyards with sheets of plastic to prevent the harvest from rotting after unexpected rainstorms. 
 Raymond Koopstad, another fruit farmer, says the erratic rainfall has forced him to treat water as a precious commodity. 
 He has switched to a drip system of irrigation, training his workers to check for leaks in every pipe, and makes compost from fallen branches and straw, which he spreads below his trees to preserve moisture. "You don't throw away any raw material now," he says. 
 Organizations such as Canada's IDRC are working on projects aimed at providing better climate forecasts to the farmers of the Western Cape so that they can manage their water resources and adopt better techniques. 
Camels, droughts and floods
 The most vulnerable Africans are the poorest: those who subsist on a few crops on tiny plots of land, or those who roam over vast territories with herds of animals. 
 The farmers of northern Ghana, for example, have endured a devastating series of droughts and floods in recent years. In some cases, a drought has resumed within a month of a heavy flood, leaving farmers both homeless and hungry. 
 Relief agencies such as CARE International are helping Ghana's farmers to diversify their livelihoods and develop new farming techniques. 
 Some are varying their crops, with sorghum and maize in the highlands and rice in the low-lying areas, to improve their chances of surviving a flood or drought. 
 In Ethiopia, pastoralists are diversifying their livestock, acquiring drought-resistant animals such as camels and goats. 

Load-Date: December 9, 2009


End of Document




How did Mother Nature get so political?; Climate change is real, but it won't get a sensible response until we cool the politics that surround it
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 12, 2017 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A13
Length: 733 words
Byline: MARGARET WENTE, Staff
Body


Mother Nature is terrifying these days. Hurricanes.
Floods. Fires. Earthquakes. Miami is under water, and Caribbean islands have been razed. The TV news looks like a trailer for the Apocalypse.
We used to know what caused these things. The gods were angry. Humankind had gone astray, and must be punished.
Natural disasters were the gods' (or God's) idea of a wake-up call.
Today, we know that's superstitious bunk. Now we know these things were caused by climate change. "After Harvey and Irma, when will Trump stop denying climate change?" asked Vogue (yes, Vogue), along with many others. Commentators warned that we'd better get used to it - this cascade of natural disasters is the new normal.
Climate change is among the biggest fault lines of the culture wars. So it's no surprise that both the left and right are playing politics with hurricanes. Last week, the right-wing blowhard Rush Limbaugh accused the weather scientists of exaggerating Irma's dangers for political ends - just before he fled his lavish Palm Beach digs to seek refuge from the storm. Commentators took the opportunity to remind us that the Trump administration has loaded up on climate-change deniers. The Environmental Protection Agency, once a hotbed of climate activism, has exiled the climate scientists to Outer Siberia.
It's hard to know who's been worse on climate policy - the Republicans, who think global warming is a left-wing conspiracy, or the Democrats, who believe the Paris Accord will actually achieve something. I'm not surprised that Americans are so suspicious of their leaders. On this, as on so many other matters, neither side deserves their trust.
So when you strip aside the politics, what do you have left?
Actually, we have no idea if these storms were caused by climate change. As The Globe and Mail's science reporter, Ivan Semeniuk, explained the other day, "[G]lobal climate models ... are generally not able to say much that is definitive about hurricanes." In the future, climate change may well result in increased rainfall from hurricanes and more serious storm surges. But for now, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, "it is premature to conclude that human activities - and particularly greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming - have already had a detectable impact on Atlantic hurricane or global tropical cyclone activity."
And if this is the new normal, it's not that different from the old normal. Earthquakes in Mexico are not surprising. Before Harvey struck, the U.S. had not been hit by a major hurricane (Category 3 or higher) in 12 years. Irma and Harvey were monsters. But, according to hurricane expert Philip Klotzbach, they rank no more than No. 7 and 18, respectively, among major hurricanes to hit the continental United States.
The bills for Harvey and Irma will be colossal. But weatherrelated disaster losses (as a proportion of GDP) have fallen since 1990. Forest fires, as the political scientist Bjorn Lomborg points out, were far more destructive 90 years ago. In the United States, the risk of death from hurricanes has dropped dramatically because of better forecasting, better preparedness and better building techniques.
In fact, it doesn't really matter what Donald Trump or Mr. Limbaugh, or Naomi Klein or Vogue think about climate change. Climate-change policies are not going to prevent hurricanes from blowing or storms from surging.
The most important thing to do is take steps to minimize the damage.
We've come a long way. The Galveston hurricane of 1900 - the deadliest in U.S. history - killed between 6,000 and 12,000 people.
What's striking about Irma and Harvey is the comparatively low loss of life - about 60 in Texas, six (so far) in Florida. Irma killed another 34 people in the Caribbean.
But Houston is already getting back to semi-normal. In Florida, there were few dramatic rescues or human tragedies to record.
Instead, reporters showed us heartwarming pictures of people rescuing stranded dogs and beached dolphins. As the storm moved upstate and grew weaker, a CNN reporter out braving the elements was upstaged by a couple of joggers in shorts.
None of this means Mr. Limbaugh was right. Irma might well have been much worse. Climate change is real, and demands a sensible response. The only way for that to happen is to take the politics out of it. If you have any ideas for doing that, please let me know.

Load-Date: September 12, 2017


End of Document




OPINION; Call climate change what it is: A crisis; Republicans are again ignoring the truth about this human-inflicted problem
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 28, 2018 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A13
Length: 721 words
Byline: LAWRENCE MARTIN
Body


WASHINGTON
The use of the term "global warming" dates back to a 1975 science article by Wallace Broecker of Columbia University. Earlier references to the effect of a changing climate were spoken of in even more wearisome terminology, such as "inadvertent climate modification."
In 1979, the National Academy of Sciences employed the term "climate change," as well as "global warming." By the late 1980s, both were in popular usage.
In those days, the consequences of changing temperatures were less known and presumed less dire. Yet decades later, when the threat is far more grave, we're still using the same lame and innocuous vocabulary to describe the scourge.
Not only do eyes glaze over when the words are spoken, ridicule is invited. With every unseasonable cold snap, some fellow of deep and penetrating wit can be relied upon to trot out a fatuous global-warming smackdown. To undermine empirical evidence, a temperature anecdote will do.
Last week, as his own government was getting set to release a devastating climate-change report that contradicted many of his beliefs, U.S. President Donald Trump noticed the weather was particularly frosty. "Brutal and extended cold blast could shatter ALL Records," he tweeted. "Whatever happened to Global Warming?" The understated phrases "global warming" and "climate change" are stale, and give no sense of ravages present and impending, or that the problem is human-inflicted. They rank with some of the all-time great euphemisms. One recalls that James Watson and Francis Crick opined that their discovery of DNA might be "of considerable biological interest."
Instead of global warming or climate change, the affliction should be called what it is: "climate crisis" or "climate cancer."
Or, instead of the cozy-sounding global warming, "planetary destruction" would be more apt.
What's in a name? A lot. Canadian Environment Minister Catherine McKenna should start a new branding campaign that instills a greater sense of urgency.
The latest U.S. report, the Fourth National Climate Assessment, is another clarion call that lawmakers of the Republican stripe are likely to ignore. The modern version of the party, as distinguished from the Reagan and Bush Senior set, is remarkably dense on the subject, and Mr. Trump was a godsend to their paleolithic passions. He revealed his insights in a 2010 statement.
"The concept of global warming," he said, "was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S.
manufacturing non-competitive."
Predictably, he has dismissed the voluminous new study that involved 13 federal agencies and hundreds of leading climate scientists, saying simply: "I don't believe it." That the experts in his own administration believe it is of no matter.
What gave this report some added heft is that it warned not just of a dire environmental reckoning, but economic ruin also.
Climate-crisis opponents claim that to do something about the problem would be a disaster for the economy. In complete contrast, the non-partisan report commissioned by Congress detailed how doing nothing would be a disaster for the economy. It warned of hundreds of billions of dollars in losses if major measures are not taken.
The Trump team tried to reduce the 1,656-page report's impact by releasing it on Thanksgiving weekend when Americans were much more disposed to eating and shopping than news watching. Climate cancer deniers such as Steven Milloy, who was a Trump transition team member on the environment, was blunt in his assessment, calling the report "made-up hysteria," emanating from "the deep state."
By rational standards, the report is another embarrassing repudiation for the climate troglodytes, but by the alternative-fact standards of the Trumpian universe, it is more like a nuisance.
Coal is the biggest climate-crisis culprit. The Trump administration has waged a campaign to revive the coal industry and create coal industry jobs, and it is not about to stop. The new head of the fraudulently titled Environmental Protection Agency is Andrew Wheeler, a former coal lobbyist who has continued along a similar deregulatory path as that of disgraced predecessor Scott Pruitt.
The fossilheads have the run of things. Now that the Democrats control the House of Representatives, they have more clout, but not enough to wage an effective war on climate cancer.

Load-Date: November 28, 2018


End of Document




The ethical upside of climate change; Even this cloud will prove to have a silver lining if it forces humanity to pull together
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 1, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; GLOBAL WARMING A FORTUNATE SORROW; Pg. A19
Length: 868 words
Byline: MARGARET SOMERVILLE
Body


 Future generations may look back on climate change as a fortunate sorrow if it proves to have been an early wakeup call for the need to find shared ethics for an interconnected world. Shared ethics are not the same as universal ethics - the idea we will all agree on all our values - which are not feasible. But finding some basic human values we can agree on, instead of always focusing on our disagreements, is important well beyond climate change. 
 Among the reasons climate change might function this way is, first, that it affects all of us, making us all personally identify with the harms and risks. Personal identification with a threat is a powerful trigger for ethical concern. 
 Second, the dangers of climate change are universal - they cross social, cultural, and religious barriers and the North/South divide.
 So, as individuals and societies, everyone must respond to the ethical issues those dangers raise. That openly challenges the intense individualism that has become dominant in contemporary liberal Western democracies. 
 Social scientists distinguish between pro-individual and pro-social behaviour. The latter stems from concern for others and a feeling of moral obligation to do the right thing by them, a feeling that research shows is more common than often assumed or recognized, especially by politicians.
 In a recent article at www.opendemocracy.net, politics professor Andrew Dobson pointed out that for climate-change solutions to be effective, they must encourage, and certainly not undermine, that moral sense. So not only might climate change provide an opportunity to develop shared ethics, but developing those ethics may help us to find solutions to climate change. 
 Third, climate change problems are not just theoretical and abstract; they are practical and concrete - another powerful trigger for ethical concern. It's much easier to ignore or dismiss ethical issues raised by situations we don't physically experience. 
 Fourth, we can start from an agreement that climate change is alarming, rather than starting from disagreement, as is more common in ethical analysis. Starting from agreement makes it much more likely we will identify the values we hold in common - something we routinely fail to do - and, as a result, reinforce and promote those values. 
 Fifth, responses to climate change will need to be based in earned trust, not blind trust. Earned trust ("Trust me because I will act in your best interests") is an egalitarian concept that requires sharing of information and decision-making. Blind trust ("Trust me because I know what is best for you") is a paternalistic concept that depends on authority, status and power. Using earned trust to address the ethical challenges of climate change will promote such trust in general, and augment social trust on a global scale. 
 Sixth, dealing with climate change provides an important example of science in the service of ethics. It makes us aware that science can help us to find solutions to ethical problems, not just create new problems. Still, a pure technological fix will not be sufficient. We must freely choose to change our behaviour to favour more the common good - including of future generations. Ethics can help us make that choice and change. 
 Seventh, climate change is a powerful reminder of our obligation to hold our world, nature and the natural (including our humanness) in trust for future generations. The new technoscience, with the unprecedented powers it gives us to change all life, means we must do that in ways no previous generations have had to contemplate. We must reconnect with nature and be guided by ethics that respect nature and the natural, and constantly ask ourselves: What do we owe our great-great-grandchildren? What are our obligations to far distant generations? Can the future trust us? 
 Eighth, climate change is a particularly appropriate context in which to develop a concept of "anticipated consent" as a guide in decision-making. That requires us to ask: Can we reasonably anticipate that future generations would consent to what we both do and don't do now? If not, ethics demand that we change our behaviour. A concept of "anticipated consent" will be ethically valuable far beyond dealing with climate change. 
 In many respects, climate change presents us with a unique opportunity to see whether we can put our ethics into practice on a global scale. Reducing its harms could become a common ethical cause we can all buy into and, in doing so, allow us to bridge all our divisions. Most of all, I propose that dealing with it ethically requires acting with profound respect for all life and what sustains it.
 And that requires having an acute sense of the finitude and fragility of the Earth, wise ethical restraint and the courage to say "no" - especially to ourselves - when ethically necessary. 
 Whether we can do that will be an important trial of whether we can do the same when it's required in relation to many future ethical issues that we are likely to face. 
Margaret Somerville is author of The Ethical Imagination: Journeys of the Human Spirit.
MARGARET SOMERVILLE
Founding director of the Centre for Medicine, Ethics and Law at McGill University 

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: May 1, 2007


End of Document




Poll finds global climate change hot issue; Federal government ignores public concern; about cutting emissions, figures suggest
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 10, 2001 Tuesday


Copyright 2001 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 885 words
Byline: MARTIN MITTELSTAEDT, Source: Decima Research Inc.
Body


 Canadians overwhelmingly believe humans cause global warming and want the federal government to do more to reduce greenhouse gas pollution, even if that means opposing the United States on the issue, a poll to be released today indicates. 
 It suggests that global-warming skeptics are rare in Canada, fewer than one in 10 of those interviewed. Nearly nine out of 10 said human activity is warming the planet. 
 Fully 93 per cent said they want the federal government to do more to cut greenhouse-gas pollution, a level of support that indicates considerable unanimity on the subject. 
 Greenpeace Canada and World Wildlife Fund Canada, two major environmental organizations, commissioned the poll, and Decima Research Inc. conducted it last month. It is being publicly released today, timed to put pressure on the federal government before international climate-change talks resume in Bonn next week. 
 The groups contend the results show that federal politicians are ignoring public concern about global warming. 
 "There is huge sentiment in Canada for action on climate change, huge sentiment for reductions in emissions, and that is simply being ignored," Peter Tabuns, executive director of Greenpeace Canada, said. "Our sense has been that what the federal government is doing, what the Liberals are doing, is really out of sync with where the Canadian public is at." 
 The climate-change talks are trying to salvage the Kyoto Protocol, which would require most industrialized countries to cut their emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat in the Earth's atmosphere. The agreement calls for reductions by 2012 to 5 to 6 per cent below 1990 levels. 
 Talks last fall in The Hague collapsed without agreement. Since then, the U.S. administration of George W. Bush has said it will not ratify the Kyoto deal, named after the Japanese city where it was negotiated in 1997. 
 Canada is viewed as a weak supporter of the climate-change treaty, Western Europe, Russia and Japan as strong ones, and the United States as hostile. 
 The poll suggests that Canadian opinion is far closer to the European view that action is needed than to the U.S. government position. 
 Respondents were told that Europe wants to implement a treaty to stop climate change but the United States doesn't. 
 They were asked if they wanted Canada "to join with Europe and implement the treaty, rather than agree with George Bush and the American government." 
 An overwhelming 78 per cent of Canadians supported the stronger European position, while only 12 per cent backed the United States. 
 Although the federal government is spending about $1.1-billion to study and combat climate change over five years, Canadian negotiators have in the past argued for weaker rules under the Kyoto Protocol. They want the pact to give credits to countries that sell nuclear reactors or have extensive forests that absorb carbon dioxide. The credits would offset emissions and reduce those countries' obligation to cut fossil-fuel pollution. 
 "The climate-change negotiators and the people who are giving them instructions are ignoring the opinions of the public," Mr. Tabuns said. 
 Canada doesn't have a long history of measuring attitudes toward global warming, although a survey conducted before the Kyoto talks found a strong desire for federal action on climate change. 
 The new poll says belief in global warming is shared widely across Canada, ranging from a low of 84 per cent in Quebec to a high of 92 per cent in the Atlantic region. 
 Even in oil-rich Alberta, 89 per cent of respondents answered yes to the question: "Sometimes climate change is called global warming. Do you believe climate change is happening?" 
 Even more Albertans - 93 per cent - agreed with the statement: "The Canadian government should do more to reduce pollution that causes climate change." 
 The poll was based on interviews with 2,011 Canadians, conducted from June 15 to June 24, a time when global warming was in the news because of a trip by U.S. President George W. Bush to Europe, where public reaction was hostile to his efforts to undermine the global-warming treaty. 
 The survey has a 95-per-cent statistical likelihood of accuracy within 2.2 percentage points, upward or downward, in its national results. The margin of accuracy of the provincial and regional results varies from 3.8 percentage points to 6.9 percentage points, upward or downward. The wider margins reflect smaller sample sizes. 
Stop global warming
Canadians are concerned with the changing climate and want the government to take action.
Sometimes climate change is called global warming.  Do you believe climate change is happening?
Yes         89%
 No           9%
 Don't know   2%
Do you believe the Canadian government should do more to reduce pollution that causes climate change?
Yes         93%
 No           6%
 Don't know   2%
How much are you concerned about the effect that climate change will have on future generations?
Very        43%
 Some        45%
 Not          7%
 Not at all   5%
Europe wants to implement a treaty to stop climate change, but George W. Bush and the American government don't.  Do you want Canada to join with Europe and implement the treaty, rather than agree with George Bush and the American government?
Yes         78%
 No          12%
 Don't know  10%

Load-Date: September 21, 2006


End of Document




Canada falling short in climate-change fight, Environment Commissioner warns
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 3, 2019 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 830 words
Byline: JEFF LEWIS, Staff
Body


Canada is not doing enough to reduce greenhouse gas emissions despite mounting evidence the country is vulnerable to rapid warming, the outgoing federal Environment Commissioner warns.
In parting comments, Julie Gelfand criticized successive federal governments, saying their failure to cut emissions is "disturbing," and urged greater action to tackle what she called one of the biggest challenges facing humanity.
The country's top environmental watchdog also noted Canada is not on track to meet its climate-change targets.
Canada has committed to slash carbon emissions 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030, but the most recent federal projections show emissions will be only 19 per cent lower by then under the most optimistic scenarios.
"A lot is at stake in terms of getting this right," she said by phone Tuesday. "Canada has to get ready to adapt to the changes."
The censure comes one day after a major federal study warned that Canada's climate is warming at twice the global rate and nearly three times the global average in the Far North. The Liberals face mounting opposition on a range of environmental policy fronts ahead of a fall election in which climate change is expected to be a defining issue.
Federal scientists said Monday average temperatures across Canada have risen 1.7 degrees and by 2.3 degrees in the North since records became available in 1948, and that further warming is unavoidable.
"For decades, successive federal governments have failed to reach their targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and the government is not ready to adapt to a changing climate," Ms. Gelfand said in a statement Tuesday morning. "This must change."
Ms. Gelfand on Tuesday released the last of her audits before her five-year term expires, including an assessment of invasive aquatic species, mining pollution and fossil-fuel subsidies.
She criticized the federal Liberals for failing to live up to a commitment to end "inefficient" fossil-fuel subsidies, which she said encourage wasteful consumption, impede investments in clean energy and undermine efforts to combat global warming.
Canada and other Group of 20 countries have pledged to phase out inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies by 2025, and eliminating them was a key campaign promise for the Liberals.
Ms. Gelfand said there is a direct link between the commitments and efforts to combat climate change, but found neither Finance Canada nor Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) adequately define what constitutes an "inefficient" subsidy. Her office found Finance Canada focused almost exclusively on fiscal and economic considerations and didn't weigh social and environmental factors, for example.
Meanwhile, ECCC looked at only 23 out of more than 200 federal organizations when it compiled an inventory of potential subsidies for the fossil-fuel industry.
The International Institute for Sustainable Development has estimated oil and gas producers receive about $3.3-billion in subsidies, including roughly $1.6-billion from the federal government.
Examples include reduced property taxes and special tax deductions.
Environment and Climate Change Minister Catherine McKenna on Tuesday said Ottawa is committed to the 2025 goal and defended wider efforts to slow climate change.
The government has so far cancelled eight of nine tax preferences that support fossil-fuel exploration or production and last week launched consultations to inform the phaseout of subsidies outside the tax system. The department says it identified four of 36 subsidies that benefit fossil fuels, but found that none of them were inefficient. They included electricity supports for off-grid Indigenous communities, charging stations for electric vehicles, as well as funding for clean technologies in the oil and gas industry.
"There's going to be a choice in this next election, quite frankly," Ms. McKenna told reporters in Ottawa. "Our party has shown we have a plan. We're going to continue to be ambitious. We're going to continue to grow our economy and create good jobs while we tackle climate change."
The Liberals face staunch opposition from some provincial premiers as well as from federal Conservative Leader Andrew Scheer over the federal carbon tax that took effect Monday in New Brunswick, Ontario, Manitoba and Saskatchewan. A spokesman for Mr. Scheer did not respond by press time.
In Alberta, United Conservative Party Leader Jason Kenney has pledged to scrap the province's carbon levy and fight the federal backstop in court should he win the April 16 election.
Alberta is also seeking an equivalency agreement on federal regulations to reduce methane emissions by 40 per cent to 45 per cent by 2025, arguing current standards would further hamper the oil and gas industry. Environmental groups have criticized Alberta's proposed rules and similarly decried a draft agreement with British Columbia, saying the provincial standards would substantially weaken efforts to curb emissions of the potent greenhouse gas.

Load-Date: April 3, 2019


End of Document




Climate change could leave billions in areas unfit for human life, study shows
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 5, 2020 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 790 words
Byline: IVAN SEMENIUK, Staff
Body


From penguins to possums, every species on Earth lives within a geographic range that is largely defined by climate - a comfort zone outside of which individual members of the species are rarely encountered.
So, too, with humans who, despite having eked out a living in some of the most inhospitable locales on Earth, are usually found in places that are far milder than those extremes.
Now, a new study shows how the global disposition of humanity's comfort zone is likely to shift because of climate change, and suggests that vast numbers of people will be negatively affected if carbon emissions due to fossilfuel consumption continue to rise unchecked.
"It comes down to saying that for each degree of global warming you get about one billion people into trouble," said Marten Scheffer, an ecologist at Wageningen University in the Netherlands and a co-author of the study.
The study found that areas that have an average annual temperature greater than 29 C - now confined to a few patches of the central Sahara desert and similar areas - will expand dramatically under a business-as-usual emissions scenario. By 2070, those regions, which are among the most hostile on Earth, could encompass most of northern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, India, Southeast Asia, northern Australia and the Amazon basin.
The result adds to the growing body of literature on the effect of a changing climate on human health and well-being, particularly in equatorial regions where temperatures are more frequently pushing the limits of what is considered safe. It also carries implications for higher-latitude countries such as Canada that may become a destination for environmental migrants if the world fails to meet emissions targets.
"At the tail end of the century, Canada is going to be a place of refuge in a climate-disrupted world," said Robert McLeman, a professor at Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, Ont., who specializes in the human effects of climate change.
Dr. McLeman, who was not involved in the study, cautioned that its conclusions should not be taken as an inevitable prediction for what will happen, but rather as a useful catalyst for policy discussions about how to maintain reasonable living conditions across as much of the planet as possible through a combination of adaptation and mitigation measures. He added that, in addition to climate, economic and political factors are likely to continue to play a large role in how and where people migrate.
The study, which included contributions by researchers in China, Europe and the United States, was published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
Dr. Scheffer said the effort began three years ago as a curiositydriven exercise to define the climatic conditions that best fit the locations where the majority of humans have lived since the dawn of history. The work involved looking at centuries' worth of population records and then going back still further with the help of archeological data to help understand where humans have been living on Earth for the past 6,000 years.
While the climate has varied across that time and civilizations have risen and fallen, the authors of the study found that the net result has been remarkably consistent. In general, in whatever era the researchers looked at, most humans at that time seemed to be living in places where the average annual temperature fell between 11 and 15 degrees. And the trend has continued into modern times despite heating and cooling technologies that make it possible for us to live somewhat beyond our natural human comfort zone.
"It was surprising to me to see how much we seem to be sticking to the same temperature conditions," Dr. Scheffer said.
The very heart of that region today includes places such as California and the mid-Atlantic region of the U.S., northern Italy and the most populous areas of China. But depending on how much the climate warms over the next 50 years, many of those areas will start to slide out of what has historically been the most comfortable and preferred climate niche for humans. Meanwhile, areas that are even warmer today will become increasingly intolerable by late in the century if the targets outlined in the 2015 Paris climate agreement are not met.
This raises the possibility of climate-related migrations in numbers greater than anything seen to date.
Dr. Scheffer, who is an affiliated member of the University of Waterloo's Institute for Complexity and Innovation, added that the COVID-19 crisis highlights the importance of forward thinking and timely international co-operation when facing challenges that affect all of humanity.
"It is possible to get our act together when we think it's essential," he said.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




Insurance in the age of climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 10, 2017 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B4
Length: 867 words
Byline: DOMINIC CLARKE
Body


Partner, insurance practice, at Blaney McMurtry LLP in Toronto
As Canadian business has discovered, the threat of global warming is no longer confined to disappearing icebergs and distant islands. Today, the risks hit much closer to home.
The 2013 Alberta floods and the 2016 Fort McMurray fires are just two examples of Canadian vulnerability to extreme weather and its devastating financial costs. At an estimated $4-billion, the damages wrought in Fort McMurray are the most expensive insured loss in Canadian history. But Fort McMurray may not retain that dubious distinction for long.
As our climate continues to change, insurance claims are expected to increase in number, complexity and dollar exposure.
Canadian business and its insurers need to assess whether and how insurance policies will respond to these claims.
Property insurance is expected to act as the "first line of defence" for Canadians seeking indemnity for extreme-weather related losses. As floods, fires and winds inflict losses across the country, these policies will be first responders.
Extreme-weather-related risks, however, will extend far beyond these typical losses. Businesses which experienced the Alberta floods or Fort McMurray fires are painfully aware of how extreme weather can impact day-to-day operations. Heavy rain, for example, may disrupt supply chains, making it more expensive or impossible to stock store shelves.
Powerful storms may cause widespread power outages, creating havoc for technology-reliant businesses. Weather that necessitates the closure of transit infrastructure will cause staffing shortages and logistical nightmares.
The 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill illustrates how extreme weather can increase exposure to environmental liability as well.
More violent ocean storms and oppressive heat can complicate cleaning or rescue operations, even as powerful winds and extreme water conditions exacerbate the spread of contaminants.
Businesses handling dangerous products should prepare for increased pollution risks associated with extreme weather.
Canadian municipalities and businesses should also expect more numerous and more severe personal-injury claims. Customers frequenting shopping malls, restaurants and big-box stores, for example, may be at greater risk of slip-and-falls as a result of increased water, snow or ice precipitation. Safety measures, such as the adequacy of snow removal practices, may require reassessment. Any business with physical operations, then, should review the coverage and policy limits contained in its commercial general liability insurance policies.
Climate change may also expose business owners and professionals to new categories of risk. Engineers, architects and those in the construction industries, for example, will be expected to design and build living and office spaces that will withstand increasingly severe weather, and risk liability if they don't. Similarly, businesses may be exposed to product liability claims when previously suitable products such as concrete, piping or steel, fail to withstand severe weather.
Extreme weather events may also lead to liability claims against directors and officers.
Shareholders may seek to sue executives whose failure to adapt to climate change or failure to comply with environmental regulations causes a fall in the company's share price. Individuals may pursue corporate boards for business decisions which pollute local waterways or farming communities and contribute to climate change.
While climate change litigation remains in its infancy in Canada, examples of novel losses grounded in climate change have already been witnessed in the United States. In one well-known case, local residents and landowners filed a class action against dozens of energy and chemical businesses seeking recovery for damages said to have been caused by their operations. Plaintiffs claimed that the emission of harmful gases contributed to global warming and the increased strength of, and damages caused by, Hurricane Katrina. In another case, an Alaskan village sued energy utilities, oil and coal companies on the basis that their greenhouse gas emissions expedited the melting of Arctic sea ice, rendering the community uninhabitable.
Both lawsuits failed. In each case, the courts implied that climate change litigation would not succeed until governments set legislative standards. In Canada, certain governments have expressed a commitment to addressing climate change by supporting clean energy initiatives. Regulatory and legislative guidelines respecting a clean energy economy could well provide the statutory basis for civil liability.
Clearly, Canadian municipalities, businesses and homeowners are already experiencing the impact of climate change. Traditional property policies cannot be expected to provide comprehensive protection for "climate change" losses. Instead, consideration should be given by businesses, insurers and brokers to the various other insurance policies available, such as business interruption, professional errors and omissions, and directors' and officers' liability policies to safeguard their employees, executives, properties and commercial operations from catastrophic losses.

Load-Date: July 10, 2017


End of Document




How to build on melting permafrost: Labrador cultural centre offers insight; Climate change is melting the ice that holds together permafrost - a concrete-like mix of soil, rocks and sand that remains frozen year-round - causing underground erosion that is destroying infrastructure and making for unique construction conditions
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 18, 2019 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 1281 words
Byline: GREG MERCER, Staff
Dateline: NAIN, N.L. 
Body


If the back end of the Puffin Snacks shop sinks any further into the ground, Dorman Webb says he'll have to start stacking the crates of beer in the opposite corner of the building just to slow things down.
Mr. Webb, who has owned Nain, N.L.'s, only beer store since 1971, admits the sinking foundation is getting a little out of hand. Inside, the tiny shop's wooden floor and shelves are slanted as if they're on a ship frozen mid-lurch. Customers kind of slide toward the cash register when they walk through the door.
"I don't know how many times I've had to jack that corner up, and the next year, it's gone down again," he said. "It's almost like Jell-O down there. There's no point in putting blocks under the store any more, because it just keeps sinking."
Thawing permafrost is changing the landscape in communities across northern Labrador. In Nain, a predominantly Inuit village that is the most northern community in Newfoundland and Labrador, the changing permafrost has affected everything from the post office to the airport to the construction of a new $18-million cultural centre.
Permafrost, a concrete-like combination of soil, rocks and sand held together by ice that remains frozen year-round, is depleting at an alarming rate across Canada's North. As the Earth's climate warms, that ice is melting, causing erosion and shifting underground that can destroy houses, roads and other infrastructure.
When the Nunatsiavut regional government opened the Illusuak Cultural Centre last month with the cutting of a sealskin ribbon and steaming bowls of partridge stew, it was celebrated as a way to preserve the region's Inuit heritage and draw tourists to the gateway of the Torngat Mountains National Park.
But it's what's underneath the building that really tells the story of how a warming climate is altering life in Labrador. It took two years of work just to prepare the ground for the centre's construction and designing a foundation capable of keeping the centre stable as the permafrost beneath it melts. The centre is built on special piles reaching down more than two dozen metres to bedrock, using huge pillars with "sleeves" that can move as the ground thaws.
"We knew before we built there was an issue with the permafrost that was different from the permafrost seen further north," said Kerry Gosse, the lead architect on the project for Stantec, the consulting firm that led the construction.
The permafrost problems added extra costs to a project already delayed by several years, challenged by a short construction season and the additional expense of bringing in materials and contractors from the south.
The building's construction, which began in 2012, may offer some lessons for communities farther north, where permafrost usually appears closer to the surface and is often thicker.
"This is the evolution, climatewise, of what people fear is going to happen further north," said Leslie Snow, a Stantec engineer who oversaw construction. "The issue here, it's a deteriorating, deep permafrost."
The centre, built on the community's shoreline on the site of a long-gone caribou meat processing plant, was designed by Todd Saunders, an internationally recognized, Newfoundlandraised architect based in Norway.
Illusuak, which in English means "sod house," is intended to serve as a centrepiece for the community, with permanent exhibits on Inuit history and culture, a gift shop, café and multipurpose theatre.
Inside the building, which was funded by the Nunatsiavut and Canadian governments and a trust fund established through the Labrador Inuit land claim settlement, there are artifacts, carvings, hunting tools and other displays that show how Inuit culture has evolved over the centuries.
The people of northern Labrador say they're continuing to adapt to a changing world.
Concern over rising sea levels along the Labrador coast also called for the construction of a massive breakwater to protect the building from the bay. For designers used to working in remote, northern communities, it was just another environmental challenge.
"Projects like this are becoming more challenging now because you have to find ways to deal with climate change," Ms. Gosse said.
Robert Way, a Queen's University geographer who worked on a permafrost study for the Nunatsiavut government, said the cultural centre sits on about 18 metres of permafrost. Scientists know Labrador's permafrost is melting, he said, but they don't know how quickly, since there haven't been many studies done in the past.
"We don't know how much it's thawed," he said. "In terms of describing change, it's hard because we don't have a lot of longterm data to look at."
Changing snowfall levels along the Labrador coast make it even harder to predict what will happen with permafrost in the future, Dr. Way said.
There's also very little funding available to monitor permafrost and other climate indicators in Labrador, he added. That presents a problem in places like Nain, a community of about 1,400 that's growing rapidly but doesn't have a lot of reliable information around which land to build on, he said.
"As these communities are trying to expand further, it's something they don't really have the resources to deal with," said Dr. Way, who is from Labrador.
"The permafrost issue is at the forefront of people's minds, but we're still not at a point where we have a good map of where the permafrost is."
In communities farther down the Labrador coast, the lack of reliable information on permafrost thaw has led researchers to rely on historical photos, using them as a rough gauge to see
where the ground has shifted and sunk, he said.
The permafrost problems in Nain extend to the community's airstrip, built on such shifting ground that it couldn't get approval to install lighting posts.
That means all flights, even medical evacuations, can only take place in daylight hours. Nain's historic wooden Moravian church, just down the road, has struggled with a sinking foundation, too, and has had its floor raised to counter the ground's erosion.
Anecdotal stories about environmental changes abound in Labrador. Locals mourn the disappearance of bakeapples, the beloved orange berries that used to carpet the landscape, and vanishing caribou herds, which they blame on a warming climate.
Sea ice, a critical link between communities and often the only way to access hunting grounds, seems to be less reliable and arriving later each season, they say.
Stretches of northern Labrador that used to be tundra just a few decades ago are now covered by two-metre-highshrubs, Dr. Way said.
As Labrador warms, it's affecting everything from building construction to traditional food sources to transportation networks. These changes can't be treated as separate issues, said Rodd Laing, director of environment for the Nunatsiavut government. For Inuit, everything springs from the land, and it's actively thawing beneath their feet.
The Illusuak Cultural Centre shows how Inuit have learned to live in a land of snow, ice and permafrost for thousands of years.
Now they're trying to plan for an uncertain future where everything seems to be changing.
"Climate change affects all those pieces. Everything is connected here, that's how Inuit are looking at this," Mr. Laing said.
"Thawing of permafrost is obviously going to have implications for infrastructure, and planning for that and being pro-active is important. But the reality of climate change is things are happening so fast, sometimes you're surprised by things."
PERMAFROST As the Arctic warms twice as fast as the rest of the world, the permafrost - permanently frozen ground - is thawing, putting cities, oil pipelines and other infrastructure at risk

Load-Date: December 18, 2019


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Insurers look for new ways to cope with climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 30, 2015 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B1
Length: 791 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


Canada's largest property insurer is launching an effort to persuade homeowners and businesses to batten down the hatches in anticipation of more extreme weather that is expected to result from climate change.
Intact Financial Corp. is also making changes to its own operations as it copes with the increased occurrence of severe storms, which now routinely cost the industry $1-billion in insured damages in Canada. The company will soon offer property owners coverage for damages from "overland flooding" - though such policies won't be available to those homeowners and businesses located in the country's most flood-prone locations.
As world leaders meet in Paris Monday for the start of the United Nations climate summit, executives from Intact Financial and researchers from the University of Waterloo will gather in Toronto to launch the Intact Centre for Climate Adaptation. The centre will conduct research and work with Canadians - both property owners and corporations - on practical measures to reduce risks posed by climate change and extreme weather. Intact will provide $4.25-million over five years.
Intact CEO Charles Brindamour said his industry is already seeing the impact of global warming in the increasing frequency of severe storms and changing weather patterns. "Given that we are on the front line, we thought we ought to find a way to help cities, provinces and the country deal with it, beyond the insurance issue," Mr. Brindamour said. "Because it is so big and it's happening and the change is very clear."
Corporate executives and their boards are increasingly required to assess the impact that changing climate could have on their operations and business models.
Institutional shareholders are demanding that companies - especially large energy companies - outline their carbon risk.
In a recent speech, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney warned that climate change could in future undermine financial stability.
The international Financial Stability Board, headed by Mr. Carney, recommended Canada and other Group of 20 countries issue clear guidelines for disclosure of carbon intensity of different assets. The board identified three types of risk that could impact corporations and, especially, the financial sector: physical damage from floods and other extreme weather events; liability claims against companies whom investors feel failed to adequately disclose or mitigate risks; and financial impacts from the transition to a lower-carbon economy.
Federal and provincial governments have largely focused on the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change, or mitigation. But it is clear that the global effort is falling short of the goal to limit a temperature increase to 2 degrees Celsius, and adaptation will be required. Scientists warn that even if the 2-degree target is achieved, the world will face disruptive weather that includes severe droughts, rising sea levels and more intense storms.
Insured damage from major storms has soared in the past decade and is now averaging around $1-billion a year in Canada, up from about $300-million at the turn of the century. And for every $1 in insurance claims, there is $3 in non-insured economic damage, the Intact CEO said. Only part of that increase can be explained by rising property values, said Blair Feltmate, a University of Waterloo professor who specializes in adaptation to climate change and heads the Intact Centre.
The Intact Centre for Climate Adaptation will work with business associations and companies in mining, utilities, energy production and telecommunications to identify priority actions to reduce their vulnerability.
"I can tell you [Canadian companies] have a very poor handle on the risk that's on their doorstep in reference to climatechange extreme-weather events and how that may disrupt business continuity," Dr. Feltmate said.
In addition to its work with the corporate sector, the centre is pursuing initiatives with individual homeowners and municipalities to prevent flooding. It is launching a Home Adaptation Audit in which inspectors will recommend low-cost, practical changes a homeowner can make to prevent basement flooding.
The centre expects to announce a partnership with a large Ontario city that will be the first to offer the program. And it will work with municipalities to protect wetlands from development and reclaim lost areas. Such natural areas - which are often lost when developers build subdivisions - provide crucial flood-control protection by acting as natural storage sites for runoff that is then slowly released into sewers and natural waterways. Dr. Feltmate said the centre aims to develop mechanisms that would provide financial incentives for landowners to preserve wetlands.

Load-Date: November 30, 2015


End of Document




An up-close look at global warming  This is not the last word on climate change, but it's a good read for those who want a wide-ranging look at the Arctic from anenvironmental perspective, with a good dash of adventure travel thrown in. THE QUIET LIMIT OF THE WORLD: A Journey to the North Pole to Investigate Global Warming
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 13, 1997 Saturday


Copyright 1997 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOK REVIEW; Pg. D21
Length: 803 words
Byline: Review by MICHAEL KEATING 
Body


By Wayne Grady 
   Macfarlane Walter & Ross, 280 pages, $29.95
  TIMING can be everything in the book business. Three years ago, Wayne Grady set sail for the Arctic with a team of researchers looking for evidence of global warming. It was a period when climate change, along with most environmental issues, had been pushed off the front pages by deficits and unemployment. Now, as the book of that voyage hits the streets, world leaders are preparing for a crucial December meeting in Kyoto, Japan, on how to control the pollutants believed to be warming the world's climate.
 Despite its subtitle, the book, like the voyage, is about a lot more than global warming. The trip by two Canadian and U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers was also an attempt to reach the North Pole by the difficult western route from the Bering Strait. Aboard were 70 of North America's best ocean scientists, and Grady salts his book with nuggets of information ranging from plate tectonics and the creation of the Arctic Ocean to the structure of polar bear fur. You even learn why U.S. Coast Guard ships, unlike their Canadian counterparts, carry almost no wooden furniture.
 As Grady records the efforts of the two ships to batter through the four-storey-high ice ridges that blocked their path, he retells stories of previous voyages. Until recent decades, attempts to sail toward the pole ended up with half-starved survivors and bits of wrecked ships drifting across the polar sea, carried like trophies by the ice floes that ground them to pieces. Even this trip, made in the summer of 1994, was no cakewalk. The ships' hulls were taking hits of up to 1,500 tons per square inch from chunks of ice that Grady describes as a "herd of white rhinos." The U.S. ship broke one propeller and damaged another of its three in the rock-hard icepack.
 The arrival at the North Pole turned surreal when the two North American ships found the nuclear-powered Russian icebreaker, Yamal. On the ice beside the giant ship was a group of Russian music and dance students, enjoying a barbecue and listening to rock music after doing a TV show that was beamed back to Russia.
 What about the climate-change story? Although science cannot be certain it will happen until it has happened, there are many suspicious fingerprints showing up on the globe. The world's surface temperature is rising and many glaciers are retreating. A recent study in Canada's Mackenzie River basin found the temperature up and the permafrost retreating northward.
 Because scientists expect global warming to be strongest and to show up first in the polar regions, the researchers aboard the icebreakers expected to find evidence of climate change. What they discovered was large amounts of relatively warm Atlantic water moving ever farther under the Arctic ice, threatening to melt it from below.
 The idea of a warmer and more open Arctic Ocean can seem appealing, but the global climate system is like some finely wrought machine created over billions of years. It is full of its own oscillations, gyrations and hiccups, but it is what we humans have come to count on as normal. Grady reminds us that tinkering with the mechanism by changing the planetary thermostat will have some unpredictable and probably unpleasant side effects.
 Just heating the oceans and melting some of the glaciers will cause sea levels to rise, threatening the world's low-lying islands and heavily populated deltas with an Atlantis-like future. As the book points out, the ocean currents are attuned to the present climate. For example, the Gulf Stream now carries warm water up the eastern side of Europe, giving Tromso, on the northernmost tip of Norway, a climate like that of southern Ontario. Changing the climate will change the way heat is transferred around the world.
 While Grady's book is far from the last word on climate change, it throws one more log on the fire of the already heated debate. It's also a good read for someone who wants a wide-ranging look at the Arctic from an environmental perspective, with a good dash of adventure travel thrown in. 
Michael Keating is a Toronto environment writer and consultant, and former environment reporter. His latest book is Canada and the State of the Planet.
Related Reading
The State of Canada's Environment-- 1996 (Government of Canada, 1996).
Climate Change 1995: IPCC Second Assessment Report,Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge University Press, 1995).
Does the Weather Really Matter?: The Social Implications of Climate Change, by William James Burroughs (Cambridge, 1997).
Global Warming: The Complete Briefing, by John Houghton (Cambridge, 1997).
Related Websites
   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change:
 www.ipcc.ch/
Environment Canada:
 www.ec.gc.ca/. For the climate change section, go to:            www.ec.gc.ca/climate/index.html.

Load-Date: December 5, 2006


End of Document




Climate change might mean Miami's 11th Super Bowl is its last
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
February 1, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. S10
Length: 950 words
Byline: STEVEN WINE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body


The forecast for the Super Bowl in Miami is grim.
Clear skies and temperatures between 15 C and 20 C are expected when the game kicks off, so weather won't be a problem.
But climate change likely will be, sooner or later. The sea and temperature are rising, posing a threat to South Floridians' way of life, including their customary spot in the NFL's Super Bowl rotation.
The game will be played Sunday in Miami for the 11th time, the most of any city. Given the changing climate, how much longer will the region be a place where the NFL wants to bring its big party?
"In 10 years maybe we'll still be functioning normally," said Harold Wanless, a leading expert on sea level rise in South Florida.
"Twenty years? I think that could be a problem."
The Miami Dolphins' stadium, the site of the Super Bowl this year for the sixth time, stands three meters above sea level. That will change, although projections vary widely.
Miami first hosted a Super Bowl 52 years ago. What will Miami be doing 52 years from now?
"We just don't know how fast the water is going to rise," said South Miami Mayor Philip Stoddard, who has long been sounding the alarm about climate change.
At some point, the time for games will end. Wanless, director of the University of Miami's geological sciences department (elevation four metres), and other scientists have warned the sea in South Florida could rise by up to 9.1 metres by the end of the century.
That's a first down's worth of water, an amount so difficult to fathom that Wanless prefers to emphasize a more conservative projection of 2.6 metres to 4.2 metres by 2100. And long before seawater begins lapping at the base of Dan Marino's statue near the Dolphins' stadium entrance, life in Miami could become less than super.
With a sea level rise of 0.6 metres - which Wanless considers possible before 2040 - failing sewage treatment plants and flooded septic systems could become a serious problem. Street flooding would disrupt transportation and the area would be at increased risk of catastrophe from hurricanes.
Obstacles to future Super Bowls in Miami might surface first not at the stadium, but in Biscayne Bay.
"Creep of fecal matter into the bay is going to make the area inhospitable, because you can't swim in the water. That is already happening now," said Albert Gomez, co-founder of the Miami Climate Alliance, a grassroots group focused on policy. "Would you want to go to Miami when the bays are full of fecal matter? Are you going to want to have a Super Bowl if you don't have that under control?" Even if sewage and septic tanks don't spoil fun in the South Florida sun, a rising sea will alter the landscape.
"Are people going to want to come to a beach if there is no beach?" Wanless said. "Which will happen. At least the beach won't be where you want it."
Another harbinger could be frequent flooding in low-lying areas. High tide in Miami Beach already causes problems.
"The issue will be if the hotel districts and transportation are compromised," Stoddard said.
"That's my big concern."
Rising temperatures are a lesser worry, although Gomez said extreme heat might someday make South Florida unsuitable for football. He pointed to a projection of 200 days above 35 C annually 50 years from now.
For the NFL, climate change won't be just a Miami problem.
The Jacksonville Jaguars' stadium sits on the banks of the St. Johns River at an elevation of 0.9 metres. The New Orleans Superdome is also at 0.9 metres. The Jets and Giants play home games 2.1 metres above sea level in New Jersey.
South Florida is built on porous limestone, which makes adaptation to a higher ocean especially difficult. And because the topography is so flat, challenges will be widespread. With a rise of 3.7 metres, high tide would cover 97 per cent of Miami-Dade County, Wanless said.
The Miami Beach Convention Center (elevation 2.1 metres) is the site of this year's Super Bowl Experience interactive theme park. The city, built on barrier islands between Biscayne Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, is already spending millions of dollars to raise streets, upgrade storm drainage and otherwise adapt to the changing climate.
"We're at the tip of the spear," Mayor Dan Gelber said. "We're going to feel it before others."
But Gelber, a Democrat, is optimistic Miami Beach can continue to hold Super Bowl events half a century from now.
"In 50 years our roads may be a little higher and our pump system may be engineered differently, but we will be dry and happy," he said. "All of this is very surmountable. We're a man-made island to begin with. You can adapt to these new challenges, but you have to adapt. You don't want to wait until you're underwater."
Also sanguine is Ben Kirtman, professor of atmospheric sciences at the University of Miami.
He said state and local governments increasingly acknowledge the need to reduce emissions and adapt to a rising sea.
Kirtman said the NFL could play a role with its big bullhorn.
"This is an existential threat to much of Miami," he said. "If the NFL shined a little light on that, that would be extremely helpful in shifting attitudes."
NFL Green has promoted environmentally friendly Super Bowl initiatives for 26 years. Projects this year included urban gardens and recycling, and the league teamed in Miami with Ocean Conservancy to raise awareness about ocean issues.
The Dolphins have virtually eliminated single-use plastics at their stadium.
"More and more, climate change is on the NFL's radar," said Susan Groh, who works for the league's environmental program as a consultant. "Any new projects we've suggested, they've always been supportive."
But for the Super Bowl in Miami, the clock is running, and no one knows how much time is left.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




Can Mozambique's farmers teach the world about survival in a changing climate?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 26, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 1300 words
Byline: GEOFFREY YORK
Body


Lead
At the age of 78, Mozambican farmer Armando Manhica can remember all the worst droughts of past decades. But he has never seen his maize plants scorched from heat as extreme as it is now.
Temperatures can climb to 45 degrees these days, producing a burning heat that destroys as much as half of his crop.
Texte/Text
"It's painful to see," he says. "These hot temperatures are nothing like the past. It makes me wonder how I'm going to feed my children and my grandchildren."
Of all the world's continents, Africa is the most vulnerable to climate change, despite contributing the least to the problem. And of the 54 countries on the continent, Mozambique is among the most exposed to the extreme weather events that are increasingly frequent here - forcing its farmers into adaptations that could be a foreshadowing of the world's future.
The most dramatic of those events was the unprecedented blow of two catastrophic cyclones that struck Mozambique in quick succession within a span of a few weeks in 2019, killing nearly 700 people and destroying thousands of homes.
The cyclones, whose enormous power was fuelled by rising temperatures in the Indian Ocean, were just the most obvious of the climate pressures. The country has been hit by harsher droughts and floods, more frequent ocean surges and violent storms, rising sea levels and crop failures.
Mozambique is a largely flat agricultural country, stretched along the Indian Ocean, with 60 per cent of its population in lowlying coastal regions, leaving it with little protection from the cyclones that hammered the country last year. Within the next two decades, according to some projections, Mozambique could lose nearly 5,000 square kilometres of coastal land, forcing a million people to migrate inland.
To make it worse, Mozambique is located in a highly vulnerable corner of the planet. Southern Africa's temperatures are rising at twice the global average, according to the International Panel on Climate Change. Most of its food is produced by subsistence farmers who depend on increasingly erratic rains.
Over the past five years, only one growing season has been normal. The United Nations food agency has described it as a "climate emergency." Across Africa, rainfall is arriving in shorter and more intense bursts, causing heavier flooding and longer dry patches between the rain.
And Mozambique has followed the same pattern.
"In the same region of the country, there can be drought on one side and flooding on the other side," says Mozambique's former agriculture and food security minister, Higino Francisco de Marrule. "We need our people to develop coping strategies, instead of being in a situation of total dependency on food aid."
Late last year, when The Globe and Mail travelled across Mozambique to southern and northern regions of the country, the impact of climate change was starkly clear. Many villagers were rebuilding their homes on elevated ground, fearing the floods that could accompany another cyclone. But beyond the droughts and the scorched crops, there were signs of new techniques to alleviate the worst of the damage.
In the village of Kwekwe, in northern Mozambique, 56-year-old farmer Rosa Jose is surviving with the support of her four adult children, who returned home to help her after the region was smashed by Cyclone Kenneth, the strongest tropical cyclone to hit the country since modern records began.
Her family often subsists on a single meal in the morning, stretched out to last a full day.
"After the cyclone, it was suffering and hunger," Ms. Jose says. "To get something to eat, we had to go to someone's farm and work for them."
Climate change has made her own farming more difficult. The seasonal rains often arrive late, and the growing seasons are becoming shorter. So, with the help of government specialists and local farm organizations, she has switched to a faster-growing seed variety for her maize crops, allowing her to harvest a crop within 90 days instead of 120 days.
"We think the seeds will make a difference in our lives - if there isn't another cyclone," Ms. Jose says.
In another climate adaptation, she is collecting the leaves from a previously ignored tree, the moringa tree, and adding them to her family's food as a health supplement. "The leaves are bitter, so we boil them and we throw away the water," she says.
The use of moringa leaves was an innovative suggestion from the government's rural development advisers, under programs supported by a United Nations agency, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
Moringa leaves are rich in vitamins and minerals, yet are often neglected by farmers. "Moringa trees are everywhere in every village," says
Mario Quissico, a rural development specialist in the Mozambican government. "The people were unaware of how rich of a food source it can be. We taught them how to cook it and use it as a spinach with their food."
Mr. Quissico is helping the farmers diversify from traditional crops to new sources of revenue: climate-resilient fruit trees, droughtresistant varieties of sweet potatoes and other vegetables, and higher-priced commodities such as honey and sesame. To boost their chances of surviving droughts, he teaches them "conservation agriculture" techniques such as mulching, crop rotation and inter-planting of diverse plant varieties.
Some farmers have managed to triple their yields of cassava by switching to climate-resilient varieties of the crop, harvesting as much as 20 tonnes per hectare.
"They can't be farming the same way as their grandfathers," Mr. Quissico says.
In southern Mozambique, where cattle farming was severely damaged by a drought in 2016, other innovations are being introduced.
Farmers are learning how to make 10-kilogram bales of hay without expensive equipment: They dig holes in the ground to help them pack the hay compactly, keeping it usable for longer periods in the lean season.
In Armando Manhica's village, where the maize crops are scorched by 45-degree heat, IFAD has financed a solar-powered water supply system to provide irrigation as well as drinking water for livestock and humans.
Farmers in another southern village, Manjangue, remember how their cattle herds were nearly annihilated by the 2016 drought, one of the harshest in the past half a century. Even now the rains are often arriving later than usual. "There is hunger for the animals and also hunger for the humans," says Henrique Tivane, 61-year-old cattle farmer.
Jonas Cubai, 69, spent most of his life as an underground mine worker in South Africa, then returned home to a family farm in Manjangue - where he lost most of his 62 cows in the 2016 drought. His crops have been reduced because he can't afford fuel for an irrigation pump, leaving him dependent on the faltering rains.
But he benefits from another innovation: a newly created association of farmers, which carefully allocates a series of fixed grazing areas to its members, boosting the efficiency of their pasture use. It's an improvement over the nomadic grazing patterns of the past, the farmers say.
The Mozambican government's response to the cyclones and changing climate has included the mapping of vulnerable and safe areas of the country, resettlement of thousands of people from coastal areas to higher ground, prepositioning of boats and other supplies in regions that could be hit by cyclones, and an earlywarning cellphone messaging system.
"Above all, the early-warning system is the main tool that we use," says Mr. de Marrule, the agriculture minister until January this year.
"It will allow people to get information on timing, severity, locations and what measures to take. The magnitude of the last cyclone was so huge that people were caught by surprise, but they're much more aware now and they listen to the advice."

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Forestry groups warn of climate change; Joint declaration comes not from scientists but from a collection of professional associations who work in the field managing forests
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 9, 2014 Wednesday, British Columbia Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. S2
Length: 604 words
Byline: MARK HUME
Dateline: VANCOUVER 
Body


Associations representing more than 9,000 forest professionals, biologists and planners have issued a joint statement recognizing that "climate change is occurring and it has fundamental impacts on British Columbia's communities and ecosystems."
The groups say the declaration, released Tuesday, is unprecedented because it comes not from climate change scientists or environmental activists but professionals who work in the field, managing forests.
"This is the first time anywhere in the world that a joint statement of this kind has been released by professional associations, and recognizes the role and responsibility of the associations and their members in addressing climate change," the groups said in a news release.
The statement comes after a year of internal discussion by the Association of BC Forest Professionals, College of Applied Biology, Association of Professional Biology and the Planning Institute of British Columbia.
"Formally acknowledging that the ecosystem is being affected by climate change is an important first step towards taking adaptive actions," said Sharon Glover, CEO of the Association of BC Forest Professionals. "We look forward to working with the other professions to ensure climate change is addressed."
The statement urges all levels of government to provide "strong action and leadership on climate change."
Andrew Young, president of the Planning Institute of B.C., said "climate change is real" and his members are concerned about the negative impacts it will have on communities and on the environment. "Unified action is needed now to help reduce the vulnerability of current and future generations to climate change induced impacts," Mr. Young said.
Casey Macaulay, a spokesman for the Association of BC Forest Professionals, said it is impossible to ignore the dramatic impacts climate change is already having in the province. A survey that drew 1,300 responses from forest professionals recorded a high level of concern about "increased levels of what we call natural disturbance and mortality due to insects and disease," Mr. Macaulay said.
"If you fly low elevation over particularly the drier Interior forests, you will see a lot of dead standing trees in the forest.
If you get down on the ground and walk you don't necessarily see the dead tops, but you can see other indicators ... [and] forest professionals are really picking up on that," he said.
"It's not like this started just last week. These changes have been going on for decades already. We haven't been great at recognizing that. So now things like wildfires that are a result of a prolonged drying period or a change in climate regime, that's in your face. Like we're looking at that and going, 'Oh, wow, we're losing forests to these massive fires,' "Mr. Macaulay said.
He said the pine beetle infestation, which has killed vast stretches of lodge pole pine, is another indication of just how profoundly climate change can affect a region. "That's a huge shift, a massive impact on a very large scale, and it's changed the industry structurally as a result," he said. "There is risk in climate change that that could happen to other species."
But Mr. Macaulay said little can be done to head off such future outbreaks. "We can only do so much to control insects or disease agents," he said. "If the conditions are perfect for them, population dynamics say that they will happen and there's not a lot we can do about it."
He said one response to climate change is using modelling to project future climatic conditions, and then planting the trees best suited for those conditions. "We're already seeing that," he said.

Load-Date: July 18, 2014


End of Document




Canada feels effect of global warming   Events such as the worst flooding in Alberta in a   century coincide with climate changes elsewhere in the world
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 19, 1995 Tuesday


Copyright 1995 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Length: 1869 words
Byline: NYT STAFF
Dateline: New York NY 
Body


New York Times and Staff
ACCOMPANY STORYLINE ON A10
  NEW YORK
 With a report from Robert Matas in Vancouver.
 Scientists have identified substantial agricultural benefits for Canada
from warming of the global atmosphere over the next 100 years, although
the country may suffer from other adverse effects, such as flooding of
coastal regions and the shrinking of its boreal forests.
    "It will be a bit like moving our geography a couple hundred miles to
the south," Environment Canada science adviser Henry Hengeveld said
yesterday. With longer and warmer growing seasons, conditions would
probably be more conducive for better growth, he said.
The growing season in the Canadian Prairies might lengthen by 10 days
for every one-degree increase in annual average temperature, according to
a United Nations report on climate change.
That climate picture emerges from draft sections of a new assessment by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and from interviews with
scientists involved in the assessment. According to the experts, Earth has
entered a period of climatic change that is likely to cause widespread
economic, social and environmental dislocation over the next century if
emissions of heat-trapping gases are not reduced.
The panel, a United Nations group, advises parties to a 1992 treaty
that are negotiating reductions in heat-trapping greenhouse gases like
carbon dioxide.
The new feature of the assessment - the first in five years by the
intergovernmental panel - is that the experts are now more confident than
before that global climate change is indeed in progress and that at least
some of the warming is due to human action, specifically the burning of
coal, oil and wood, which releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Like its predecessors, the forecast depends heavily on uncertain
computer simulations of the atmosphere's response to heat-trapping gases.
While some environmentalists and their allies have long believed
potentially catastrophic human-induced climate change to be a fact, and
some political conservatives and industry groups have been skeptical,
experts in the mainstream of climate science have never confirmed either
view.
Dr. Hengeveld said the combination of several recent events in Canada,
such as the worst flooding in a hundred years in Alberta, several years of
extensive forest fires and the warmest June and July on record, indicate
that the effects of global warming and climate change are now being felt.
Each event by itself does not substantiate the theory of global
warming, but as they coincide with similar events around the world, a
picture is emerging that is consistent with the theory, he said.
"It's not absolute proof; it may be another 10 or 15 years until we
know."
So far, most governments have taken small steps to rein in emissions of
greenhouse gases, with the hope of at least avoiding further contribution
to the warming problem.
But even before the current reassessment, parties to the 1992 treaty
had agreed that these steps were inadequate and had opened talks aimed at
stronger measures.
According to draft sections of the new forecast, some of the predicted
effects of climate change may now be emerging for the first time or with
increasing clarity. These are possible early effects:
. A continuing rise in average global sea level is likely to amount to
more than half a metre by the year 2100. This, say the scientists, would
inundate parts of many heavily populated river deltas and the cities on
them, making them uninhabitable, and would destroy many beaches around the
world.
At the most likely rate of rise, some experts say, most of the beaches
on the East Coast of the United States would be gone in 25 years. They are
already disappearing at an average of .6 to .9 metres a year.
In Canada, higher sea levels would affect the urban waterfront in
several Maritime communities, with the disappearance of several fish-plant
wharves, railway lines, roads and bridges.
. There would be an increase in extremes of temperature, dryness and
precipitation in some regions. A U.S. government study conducted by one of
the panel's scientists has shown that these extremes are increasing in the
United States. There is a 90 to 95 per cent chance, the study concluded,
that climate change caused by the emission of greenhouse gases like carbon
dioxide is responsible.
The intergovernmental panel forecasts an increase in droughts like the
current one in the Northeastern United States, heat waves like the one in
Chicago this summer, and more fires and floods in some regions.
The average temperature in Canada has increased in the last century by
1.1 degrees Celsius, about twice the global increase. The average masks
regional differences, with average temperature in the Mackenzie Valley
rising 1.7 degrees, and a rise of 1.4 degrees in the Prairies. The average
temperature increase in Ontario and Quebec over the past century, however,
has been only 0.5 degrees.
A U.S. government study conducted by one of the panel's scientists has
shown that these extremes are increasing also in the United States.
. There would be a "striking" retreat of mountain glaciers around the
world, accompanied in the Northern Hemisphere by a shrinking snow cover in
winter. In some semi-arid regions, the panel says, runoff from melting
glaciers may increase water resources. But in most other places, rivers
and streams could be diminished in the summer.
Beneficial effects, if the panel's forecast is right, would include,
for instance, milder winters in northern climes, an increase in rainfall
in some regions that need it, and faster crop growth. Grain belts of North
America and Russia could expand. Agricultural production worldwide is not
expected to decrease much.
Dr. Hengeveld said Canada would feel the impact greatest at the edges.
The northern part of Canada's forests would have improved conditions while
substantial parts of the southern forest disappear under dry, hot weather.
  Changes in agriculture will be more benefical because crops can adapt to
changes more quickly than forests, he added.
But the news is not entirely favourable for agriculture. Although the
growing season will be longer and hotter, the soils will probably be
drier. In a dry year, the yield will be substantially less.
Regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, South and Southeast Asia and
tropical Latin America, however, could suffer complete loss of their
harvests. Deserts are expected to expand, and the heartlands of continents
to become drier. There would be more rain throughout the world. Northern
temperate regions would experience more rain and less snow in winter. In
summer, water would evaporate faster, drying the soil.
Natural ecosystems, being untended, would be even more vulnerable than
cropland. Forest trees could not migrate northward fast enough to keep up
with shifting climatic zones, and some forests would disappear, the panel
says.
Computerized models indicated that if atmospheric carbon dioxide levels
double, "one-third of all the forest area of the Earth will change," said
Dr. Steven Hamburg, a forest ecologist at Brown University who is a member
of the intergovernmental panel. "But we still don't have a good grasp of
what it will look like," he added.
Carbon dioxide concentrations are expected to double late in the next
century if no further action is taken to limit emissions.
Climate forecasting is a difficult and often controversial science. One
major subject of dissension are the computer models on which the
intergovernmental panel's report largely depends. The climate experts on
the panel believe their models have become increasingly reliable.
But skeptics continue to assert that the models fail to simulate the
present climate realistically and hence are an unsure guide to future
climates.
There is wide agreement among scientists that the average surface
temperature of the globe has already risen by about one degree Fahrenheit
over the last century, with the steepest rise taking place in the last 40
years.
But given the natural variability of the Earth's climate and the wide
fluctuations in temperature known to have occurred in the distant past,
climate experts have until now been almost unanimous in saying they could
not prove that human emission of greenhouse gases was playing a part in
the warming.
Scientific opinion among climatologists is now shifting, and more are
prepared to say that human activity is a likely cause of at least part of
the climatic change experienced so far.
The human contribution to global warming could range from highly
significant to trivial. The panel scientists say it is not yet possible to
measure how much of the warming has been caused by human activity and how
much is a result of natural causes.
Computer models are the principal basis for the draft report's forecast
that the world's average surface temperature will rise by about 1.5 to 6
degrees Fahrenheit by the year 2100 if no further action is taken to rein
in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Further warming - 50 to 70 per cent more than what took place by 2100 -
would take place after that year, the report says. The warming would be
somewhat larger if, as appears possible, industry stops emitting sulfate
aerosols, which exert a cooling effect by reflecting sunlight and are air
pollutants in their own right.
Even if atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases were stabilized
immediately, the report says, the world would still warm by about 1 to 3.5
degrees, resulting in some degree of climatic dislocation.
The intergovernmental panel, which consists of about 2,500 scientists
around the world, is divided into working groups according to specialty.
The co-authors of each of the assessment's many chapters are also selected
so as to represent as many countries as possible. Dozens of scientists
typically contribute to each chapter.
The overall effort and the selection of leading authors are in the
hands of scientists approved by governments that are parties to the 1992
treaty.
The panel's draft report has yet to undergo review by governments, but
its members say they expect few if any substantial changes in the
findings.
Members of the panel said in interviews that there was a range of views
among their group as to the impacts of the predicted warming. The draft
reports, they said, represent a reconciliation of these views.
 Deltas in distress
   If the effects of global warning raise sea levels an average of a foot  and a half around the world, as some scientists predict, parts of many  populated deltas would become uninhabitable.  United States...........Mississippi River  Argentina...............Prana River  France..................Rhone River  Netherlands.............Rhine River  Italy...................Po River  Egypt...................Nile River  Nigeria.................Niger River  India...................Narmada and Tapti River  India...................Krishna and Godavari River  India...................Cauvery River  India...................Mahanadi River  Pakistan................Indus River  Vietnam.................Red River  Vietnam.................Meking River  Myanmar.................Irrawaddy River  Bangladesh..............Ganges-Brahmaputra River  China...................Yellow River  China...................Yangtze River  China...................Pearl River  Source: S.P. Leatherman, Univ. of Maryland   

Load-Date: January 10, 2007


End of Document




The costs of climate change; India has become a key player in climate change, and its consent to a deal, or lack of it, will make or scuttle any international arrangement. Yet the country insists the problem was created by developed nations, who should pay when it comes to setting things right
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 7, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; ENVIRONMENT / INDIA; Pg. A7
Length: 1868 words
Byline: STEPHANIE NOLEN
Dateline: NEW DELHI 
Body


 In the village of Pujar in the Himalayas, the burans - a species of rhododendron - flowers each spring. And the tradition in Pujar, since time immemorial, is that no one picks and eats the flowers until after the spring Shiva festival. To do otherwise is to risk the anger of the gods, explains Himal Behan, who farms near the foot of the glacier. 
 "But this year, the tree flowered in December. Even people who are 80 or 90 years old in my village say they have never known this to happen. And everyone is scared." 
 There is more to be afraid of than just one wonky flowering tree and its gods: Their environment has gone crazy altogether. The glacier is melting, she said, and huge chunks of ice break off and cause flash floods. At the same time, the traditional fresh water sources around the village have dried up, something else the old folks say they have never seen. 
 "It didn't get cold enough for us to even wear our winter clothes last year," Ms. Behan, 32, said - and that meant it wasn't cold enough to sow a wheat crop either. "We depend on agriculture to live. If there is no snow or rain in winter, there is no wheat, and we have no other way to earn an income. There are no jobs. We'll just die." 
 Ms. Behan's is one voice among thousands being raised with growing urgency in a country that is, some say, increasingly, disastrously affected by climate change. 
 India is in the midst of a massive drought that could imperil basic food for millions of people; monsoon rains have failed entirely in parts of the country. At the same time, other areas have been hit with vicious cyclones that left tens of thousands of people homeless. And a giant impenetrable cloud of what's called "black carbon" is rapidly melting the Himalayan glaciers, with - as Ms. Behan points out - a host of dire consequences. 
 And yet, outside India, the country is known for what is perceived as intransigence on the subject of climate change - a stubborn insistence that the problem has been created by the carbon profligacy of developed countries, and that India's right to economic development cannot be imperilled by emissions caps designed to make up for Western greed. 
 The next concerted push for a global agreement on climate action comes at the United Nations climate summit in Copenhagen in early December. The United States, under its new administration, is perceived to be on side and willing to sign an agreement that puts restrictions on carbon emissions. Now it is India and its rapidly developing neighbour China that have moved into focus as the key players, whose agreement, or lack of it, will make or scuttle a deal. 
 China is, of course, a vastly greater consumer of energy, and a vastly greater polluter, than India. Yet India, in some ways, is a more challenging case - because China has already engaged more pro-actively with clean-energy alternatives, and because its authoritarian government has shown itself capable of tackling this issue, when it chooses, in a way that India's never has. 
 Yet the rapacious pace of growth here, predicted to be back up to 8 per cent by the end of this year, and the rapidly expanding consumer class hungry for everything from cars to iPhones, mean that India's actions on climate have global consequences. 
 The Indian position, as articulated by J. M. Mauskar, a senior official in the Ministry of Environment and Forests who has negotiated for India at previous climate talks and will likely sit at the table in Copenhagen, too, goes like this: Global warming is caused predominantly by the stock of accumulated greenhouse gases, not current emissions. 
 The average stay on Earth of carbon dioxide, the most critical of these gases, is at least 100 years. The current stock has been accumulating since the Industrial Revolution, long before India was a producer. India is "resource-rich, brain-rich, but still a poor country," and it is the obligation of any Indian government to expand the economy and extend development to citizens as quickly as possible, which inevitably will mean carbon fuel consumption. 
 At the same time, India is an energy importer and already extremely frugal in consumption compared with Western nations. It is too soon to say for certain that problems such as droughts and cyclones in India are anything more than standard climate variability. But if the developed world expects India to sign on to a carbon-reduction plan, it better be prepared to pay for it, in cash and technology transfer. 
 "A fact is a fact, which no one can dispute ... Who caused the stock to be accumulated, and who profited? No one disputes this," Mr. Mauskar said. 
 And, he said, it isn't just India: "Indian 'recalcitrance' is that of all developing countries, and if it wasn't, the G77 would be the G3½ or something." 
 The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change acknowledges the primary responsibility of developed countries in causing global warming, notes that poor countries have the dominant priority of eradicating poverty through economic development, and states that rich nations will assist developing ones with their mitigation efforts through both financial compensation and technology transfer. 
 But that, Mr. Mauskar said, has been slow to happen - because the West has pleaded empty pockets since the onset of the financial crisis, and because Western governments claim that most energy-efficiency technologies are privately held and not theirs to transfer. 
 The Climate Action Network of South Asia says the price tag to help nations in this region adapt will be $150-billion (U.S.). 
 Mr. Mauskar said that, perceived intransigence notwithstanding, the Indian government has engaged significantly with climate change - through a national action plan released last year, and by funding adaptation efforts (such as economic support for small farmers to switch to growing crops suited to warmer temperatures) all over the country. The government says 2 per cent of GDP is currently spent on coping with climate change. 
 The action plan calls for boosting solar power production; reforestation so that a third of the country is forested, up from 23 per cent; providing financial incentives for energy efficiency; research on glacier melt; and development of sustainable agriculture. 
 But it omits any hard targets, particularly on emissions. The government, in fact, has refused to discuss commitments. At the G8 summit last year Prime Minister Manmohan Singh would pledge only that India's per-capita carbon-dioxide emissions would never exceed those of the developed world. 
 The government has the rare support of many of the country's vibrant civil-society organizations for its position. 
 "It's developed nations that have to stop the catastrophe and make sure there is a fair deal in Copenhagen - because of their historic responsibility," said Aditi Kapoor, a climate expert with Oxfam India. "Instead of talking about what they will do today, developed countries want to talk about what India will or won't do in the future. It's a distraction." 
 Two-thirds of Indians still live in villages, she noted; in Ms. Behan's village of 600 people, no one owns a car, or even a motorbike; they have electrical service for a few hours a day that each house uses to power a single light bulb; there is one television in all of Pujar. How, Ms. Kapoor asked, can the West, with its rapacious energy consumption, say that Indians such as Ms. Behan and her family are the problem, or that they do not have a right to this, or more? 
 Already, government is focused on developing in the least-destructive fashion possible, she added, following a low-carbon path wherever possible and "leapfrogging" some of the choices and technologies used in the West to move directly to cleaner alternatives. 
 Others here, however, feel the national plan is unrealistic about the twin goals of lowering environmental damage while maintaining or accelerating economic growth. 
 "It's devoid of rigour, clarity, depth, vision or urgency," said Sudhirendar Sharma, a water expert who heads the Ecological Foundation in Delhi. The plan emphasizes the Indian right to economic development above all else, and it relies on the kind of co-operation between ministries that is rarely seen here. 
 Its goals are often impractical, he said - such as producing 20,000 MW of solar power in 20 years compared with less than 200 MW now. "Where is the money and where is the industry producing solar panels?" 
 The report lists no economic activity that must change, does not discuss nuclear power, seen here as the clean alternative, or the end to subsidies on oil and gas for individual consumers. 
 In spirit, he added, it is bellicose. 
 "There is also a problem with labelling emissions as 'Indian,' 'European' and so on ... the atmospheric warming effects of carbon dioxide make no distinction between emissions from India and those from anywhere else in the world. Defending the 'Indian' right to economic development through carbon emissions may sound very gallant in the domestic arena, but it will do nothing for the actual problems that will ensue with climate change." 
 Observers watching preparation for the Copenhagen talks believe China may be ready to make some firm commitments - both because of growing domestic concern about the issue and because its reliance on Western markets makes China more susceptible to pressure than India, where the major engine of the economy is domestic consumption. 
 Mr. Mauskar said India will be quite willing to make a deal, if it's a fair one. 
 "It's not out of cursedness we want to peak [carbon production in future], because we will suffer for it. We want to mitigate because we will suffer most," he said. "But the extent to which developing countries meet their targets will depend on what developed countries are willing to fund." 
 Sayyed Iqbal Hasnain, one of India's leading glaciologists, who believes the Himalayas may be denuded of all snow and ice in as little as 20 years, despairs at the incompetent bureaucracy, the corruption and the short-sightedness of parliamentarians that, he said, is hampering any progress here. Just a few weeks ago, he travelled by train across China and returned depressed by how much was happening there - from solar-powered communications towers to energy-efficient buildings to intensive research. 
 "We have all these grandiose plans, and yet nothing is happening in India," he said. "I believe government is sincere, but we have a problem of implementation: Even if India makes commitments in Copenhagen, it's a separate story whether it can keep them." 
 ***** 
 By the numbers 
 1.2 
 India's annual per capita carbon-dioxide emission in tonnes. The world average is slightly more than three tonnes. The U.S. per capita emission is 20 tonnes, and the Canadian figure is 16 tonnes. 
 20 
 Number of years before India's total emissions will equal that of the United States, if India grows 6 per cent faster than the U.S. (the pace before the economic crisis). 
 4% 
 The annual growth in energy consumption in India, as GDP grows by an average of 9 per cent per year. Over the past four years, China's GDP and its energy consumption have both grown at an average of 11 per cent per year. 

Load-Date: September 7, 2009


End of Document




Where the four main parties stand on climate policy; Heading into the election campaign, the major parties aren't disputing that human beings are responsible for climate change, or that the consequences of a warming planet pose dramatic threats to the global population and other species. They do differ widely, however, on how deeply Canada needs to cut greenhouse gas emissions, how those emissions should be cut and at what cost
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 11, 2019 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 2971 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY, MARIEKE WALSH
Body


The large-scale global release of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere because of industrialization has caused Earth's average temperature to rise over the past century.
In a 2018 report, the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) - the leading advisory body on the issue - emphasized that climate change is already happening and warned about its serious health and economic consequences.
Nearly every country in the world is a party to the 2015 Paris accord on climate change, in which the global community agreed to prevent temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius higher than preindustrial levels, with the goal of limiting warming to 1.5 degrees.
The IPCC report concluded that even that 0.5-degree difference in warming could result in 420 million fewer people being exposed to severe heat waves and cut in half the number of animals and plants that would lose habitats and risk extinction.
The report, authored by 90 scientists, shows that at the current rate, the world would see between 2.7 and 3.4 degrees of warming, which would result in catastrophic effects on human society and the broader environment.
For Canada's targets, the report's findings suggest the country would have to cut emissions by about 40 per cent less than 2005 levels by 2030 in order to do its part to limit warming to 1.5 degrees, said Andrew Leach, an environmental economist at the University of Alberta.
In advance of the Paris agreement, then-prime-minister Stephen Harper pledged that Canada would reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 30 per cent less than 2005 levels by 2030. Justin Trudeau's Liberal government reaffirmed those targets when it took office.
The political debate in Canada is heightened by the regional nature of the resource economy. Alberta and Saskatchewan are heavily dependent on coal for their electricity and on oil and gas production as their economic engines.
Parties that promise aggressive actions to rein in emissions are often accused of threatening economic prosperity, while they counter that a sound economy depends on sustainable environmental practices.
THE PLAN The Liberals go into this election campaign with four years of climate policy behind them, and will release a platform during the campaign laying out how they will build on that action if re-elected.
Immediately after winning the 2015 election, Mr. Trudeau sought to differentiate his government from Mr. Harper's on climate-change policy.
In December, 2016, Mr. Trudeau concluded a sweeping agreement with provinces and territories (minus Saskatchewan) that laid down a road map for achieving the Paris targets and promised joint action. The federal government has started to enact some 50 measures - from the carbon tax, to support for electric vehicles, to regulations on the carbon content in fuels, to investments in public transit and clean technology. The government has also set a target that by 2030, 30 per cent of light-duty vehicles sold will be zero-emission vehicles.
The carbon tax is at the centre of the Liberal plan, and is a lightning rod for federal and provincial conservatives. It kicked in at $20 a tonne - roughly 4.3 cents a litre at the gas pump - on April 1, and rises $10 each year to $50 a tonne in 2022. The federal tax is imposed on provinces that do not have their own levy or do not meet federal standards. Ontario, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and New Brunswick are currently covered by the federal levy, and are soon to be joined by Alberta.
It applies to consumers - who get rebates through the tax system to offset the cost impact - as well as to businesses. Large industries pay the levy on only a small percentage of their emissions - from 5 per cent to 20 per cent depending on the sector - in order to protect business competitiveness.
The carbon-tax system put in place by the Liberals has a carrot-and-stick approach. On the one hand, the price on carbon acts as an incentive for companies and individuals to find a way to reduce their carbon footprint in order to avoid the higher costs associated with a carbon tax. On the other, the rebate that is given to consumers acts both to cover the costs for people who have no other option but to drive their car and has the added benefit of rewarding consumers who reduce their footprint because they get the same rebate no matter how much pollution they create.
If the Liberals are re-elected to government, they say they will consult with provinces, territories and other interest groups to determine the trajectory of the tax after 2022.
A new Liberal government would also have to finalize the proposed Clean Fuel Standard, which would require energy companies to reduce the overall GHG content of the fuels they sell by mixing in biofuels and other renewable sources, making their processing operations more energy efficient and gaining credits by financing other emission-reduction projects.
THE GAPS The Liberals maintain that they are on track to reach Canada's 2030 targets, but the government's own numbers show their plan will fall short. According to Environment and Climate Change Canada, there is a 79-megatonne shortfall that remains unaddressed. The Liberals counter that the gap will be covered by "unmodelled measures and future reductions," including current investments in public transit and new technology and "future federal, provincial and territorial measures."
However, UBC professor Kathryn Harrison said "the gaps, or the missing parts, of the Liberal plan are how to fill the shortfall," and she noted that the hole has "almost doubled" since the Liberal's climate-change plan was announced in 2016.
The Liberals say they will unveil more ambitious policies during the campaign. An advisory group - co-chaired by Montreal environmentalist and now Liberal candidate Stephen Guilbeault - recommended the government adopt regulatory mandates on zero-emission vehicles to ensure Canada meets its target.
It's unclear whether those ambitious plans will include ramping up Canada's targets to bring them in line with what the UN's advisory committee now says is needed for emissions cuts. Minister of Environment and Climate Change Catherine McKenna has acknowledged that urgency, but has been vague on how a re-elected Liberal government would respond to it.
The Liberals will also have to outline how they will manage the balance between cutting emissions on the one hand and resource development on the other. Ms. McKenna says the economy and environment go together, but partisans on the left in the highly polarized national debate often see the Liberals as leaning too heavily toward the other side. Detractors point to the government's decision to buy the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion for $4.5-billion as proof of the imbalance. The pipeline will allow for much more oil sands development - a key contributor to greenhouse gas emissions - even as Canada touts the need to cut emissions.
THE PLAN In June, Conservative Leader Andrew Scheer released his party's environmental platform that outlines the party's plan for measures to address climate change. Mr. Scheer vows to repeal the federal carbon tax as well as the planned Clean Fuel Standard, which would force fuel providers to lower the GHG emissions associated with their products.
The Conservative Leader noted that it was his predecessor, Mr. Harper, who first set Canada's current emissions targets. His plan would give the country the "best chance" to meet those targets, he said, while stopping short of actually committing to that goal.
Rather than taxes and regulations, the Conservative Party's climate platform relies on tax incentives and spending to support the development of technology that would allow consumers and industry to improve their energy efficiency and reduce the carbon content of the fuels industry produces. It promotes carbon capture and storage - which has been adopted by two oil refineries in Alberta and a coal-fired generating station in Saskatchewan - as the kind of technology that Canada can not only deploy at home but sell to the rest of the world.
While the Conservatives pledge to eliminate the federal carbon tax as it applies to both consumers and large industrial polluters, they would replace it with "emission standards" for major industries that would require them to reduce GHGs to a prescribed limit. The platform gives no indication where those limits would be set, how they will be enforced or how much of a penalty companies would face if they exceed them. Instead, it says companies would be required to invest a set amount per tonne into technology that would help them lower their emissions.
The Tories also propose a two-year program of tax incentives for homeowners to undertake energy retrofits in order to cut their energy consumption and related GHG emissions. A household could save up to $3,800 annually if it spends $20,000 on energy-saving renovations.
The party is also promising to negotiate agreements that would allow Canada to claim credit for the sale of lower-carbon fuels to countries that would otherwise be relying on coal or other high-emitting sources. The Paris climate accord contains a provision - Article VI - that facilitates international co-operation by allowing the transfer of credits for emission reductions between countries. The Conservatives say the international sale of liquefied natural gas would more than offset the increased emissions in Canada by, for example, lowering the reliance on coal in China.
THE GAPS The Conservative Party approaches climate-change policy with two baselines that separate it from the other parties: it staunchly supports the expansion of the oil and gas sector, and says that it does not believe that policies tackling climate change should impact household pocket books. The policy options left to the Tories then are limited, and several experts have concluded that they will fall far short of Canada's commitment.
Simon Fraser University's Mark Jaccard, who sits on the UN's advisory panel on climate change, modelled the impact of the plan and said it would lead to increased greenhouse gas emissions between 2020 and 2030.
The Conservatives' plan to cap emissions for large emitters and charge those who blow past their limits is in effect a carbon tax, but because there is no explanation of what the cap is or what the tab would be for companies that break it, Prof. Jaccard said its impossible to know the effect it will have.
The plan focuses on international efforts to cut emissions and suggests that the global problem requires a global solution. However, there is no global enforcement for emissions reductions.
The Conservatives would rely on the Paris accord's Article VI to claim credit for the sale of lower-carbon energy sources, such as LNG, to replace coal in the global electricity sector. The article might also be applied to the sale of technology needed to reduce emissions overseas, they say.
However, international negotiators have been unable to agree on the rules for how Article VI would operate. At the very least, two countries would have to agree on the transfer of credits, and it remains unclear how those credits would be generated.
However, tackling climate change outside of Canada's borders has some merit, according to Jennifer Winter, an assistant professor at the University of Calgary. Ms. Winter said paying to cut emissions in countries where it is cheaper to do so is a "reasonable" approach, although it would send money out of the country.
MOCRATS THE PLAN The NDP says it would ramp up Canada's plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions - bringing them 38 per cent lower than 2005 levels by 2030. The party says that's what is required for Canada to do its part to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5 degrees higher than preindustrial levels.
To get there, the NDP says it would continue with Canada's carbon-pricing regime, including maintaining the pricing set by the Liberals from 2019 to 2022.
However, New Democrats do plan to tweak the carbon tax. According to the party, the rebates that are currently sent to all households will no longer be sent to millionaires, and the extra exemptions that the Liberals gave to trade-exposed industries through the output-based pricing system will be removed.
This means all industrial heavy emitters will have to pay a carbon tax on emissions once their emissions exceed 70 per cent of the industry average. Under the Liberal government's policies, the benchmark is 80 per cent, and some sectors were given higher exemptions. The party is also setting a target of 2040 to only sell zero-emission cars in Canada.
To reach the new targets, Leader Jagmeet Singh said New Democrats would spend $15-billion on their climate plan over the course of their first mandate.
The NDP is committing to a suite of aggressive timelines to remove fossil fuels from the electricity grid, transportation and building sectors. It would offer low-interest loans in order to finance energy-saving retrofits of all of Canada's housing stock by 2050, with half of them completed by 2030.
The party also wants to spur innovation by establishing a Canadian Climate Bank with a $3-billion fund for investments in the low-carbon economy. It would also eliminate fossil-fuel subsidies. To measure its progress, the NDP is promising to create an independent Climate Accountability Office to track the progress of emissions cuts.
THE GAPS Experts who spoke with The Globe and Mail said the key questions around the NDP's plan come down to timing, details and a failure to address jurisdictional barriers.
"They haven't got the detail of how they would get there," Prof. Harrison said, pointing out that it's not clear how much emissions reduction would occur from electrification of transportation, or from home retrofits.
The same questions apply to the carbon tax, which under the NDP plan appears to have roughly the same trajectory as the Liberal levy.
Prof. Jaccard said that to be able to assess the party's plan, he would need to see a carbon price that is progressively more stringent, but he said that option isn't detailed in the plan. Similarly, he notes that none of the party's goals around retrofits, the electrical grid or zero-emission vehicles are accompanied by enforcement mechanisms. Without those mechanisms, he said, the uncertainty around their impact increases.
Finally, Prof. Leach, of the University of Alberta, says that the plan set out by Mr. Singh would spark even more jurisdictional fights between Ottawa and the provinces. For example, building codes are adopted and enforced at the provincial level, rather than the federal level as suggested by the NDP's plan.
GREEN PARTY THE PLAN Green Party Leader Elizabeth May compares the response Canada needs to bring to climate change to Winston Churchill's campaign to defeat fascism in the Second World War.
To respond to climate change, the Greens say Canada needs a "war cabinet" made up of members from all parties.
The party is pledging to double Canada's GHG-reduction targets, bringing Canada's goal to cut emissions to 60 per cent lower than 2005 levels by 2030.
The Greens say they would hike the carbon tax annually by $10 until 2030, which would raise it to $130 a tonne in that year.
The party also says it will eliminate all fossil-fuel subsidies and ban hydraulic fracking, which is used by non-oil-sands oil and gas producers throughout Western Canada.
The Greens would also stop all pipeline expansion, including the Trans Mountain pipeline project.
Similar to the NDP, the Green Party is proposing dramatic changes to the building, electricity and transportation sectors, but on even tighter timelines.
The Greens have not yet listed a price tag for these policies or explained whether it would be done through incentives, such as tax breaks or regulations.
They would require all new cars sold in Canada to be electric by 2030, and phase out all traditional cars by 2040. They pledge to require energy-saving retrofits of all buildings - residential, commercial and industrial - by 2030. And they propose to eliminate coal and natural gas from Canada's electricity generation by 2030.
The party says it will release more details for its plan during the election campaign.
THE GAPS The concerns expressed by experts over the timing, costs and lack of detail about the NDP's plan are amplified when they turn to the Green Party. A question echoed by professors Jaccard, Harrison and Leach was "how" the party would meet the goals.
A regional dimension that is not addressed in the Green Party's plan is what happens to refineries in Montreal and New Brunswick when the Green Party bans fossil-fuel imports. At the national level, Mr. Leach said the plan could look doable because we are a net exporter of crude, but he notes that since no pipeline connects Eastern Canada to the Prairies, those refineries could be cut off. "There's something that has to give," Mr. Leach said: Either those refineries are shut down or the party has to expand rail and tanker capacity.
Its proposal to phase out all fossil-fuel electricity hits up against regional and timeline challenges, which Mr. Leach said "[makes] it nearly impossible." Electricity is a provincially regulated business and, in some cases, provincially owned.
Alberta is currently in the midst of replacing coal with renewable sources and natural gas. That cuts related emissions in half, but it's still a fossil fuel.
The mammoth task of retrofitting all housing stock also raises timeline questions, according to several experts who spoke with The Globe. Put in perspective, it would require 10 per cent of people to be moved out of their houses each year for a decade in order to complete the retrofits in the time prescribed by the party.
"It's more of a signalling device than a credible plan," Ms. Winter said.

Load-Date: September 11, 2019


End of Document




UN gives leaders 10 years to curb CO2; Climate-change panel says greenhouse gases must peak in next decade or the cost of their consequences will rise sharply
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 12, 2017 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 697 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY, Staff
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


Global leadership is urgently needed to ensure greenhouse gas emissions peak within 10 years, or the future costs of reining them in and adapting to a changing climate will rise dramatically, the head of the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said on Monday.
The IPCC's Hoesung Lee spoke at an Ottawa session on Canada's climate challenge, where he dodged questions about the Trump administration's opposition to concerted global action on climate change, saying it is not his role to comment on policies of member states.
Based on the panel's scientific work, Dr. Lee said global temperatures are rising at a unprecedented pace and that concerted action is required to avert the worst impacts of rising sea levels, threats to species and extreme weather events.
"The important matter is the speed of change," the soft-spoken South Korean economist said in an interview after his speech.
"We know now that the global warming is unprecedented and at the same time, it may be happening much faster than the capacity to adapt. Which means that sooner or later, the concern about cascading risks and the irreversibility in certain ecosystems becomes a real concern."
U.S. President Donald Trump has questioned the science of climate change, famously tweeting at one point that it was a "hoax" perpetrated by the Chinese. The new administrator for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Scott Pruitt, recently questioned whether carbon-dioxide emissions from fossil-fuel use is contributing to climate change, as IPCC reports have concluded.
Earlier this week, Mr. Trump's Energy Secretary, Rick Perry, attended a Group of Seven ministerial meeting and blocked a proposed statement in which ministers would have reaffirmed their governments' commitment to the Paris accord, which was adopted by 195 countries in December, 2015.
The IPCC and other international bodies have said greenhouse gas emissions need to peak before 2030 - some say by 2020 - to give the world a reasonable chance of limiting average global temperature increases to less than 2 C, as countries pledged in the Paris agreement.
"If we miss that early peaking, the implication is that it will be much costlier to achieve that two-degree goal," Dr. Lee said.
"It means temperatures will rise by more than two degrees with consequences attending that increase in temperatures.
The probability of extreme weather events occurring would increase, and that should be a concern for policy makers and investors around the world."
Carbon pricing is a "very critical" tool for driving the transition to a lower-carbon economy, though other measures are required, he said. About 25 countries around the world are now adopting some form of carbon pricing, and there are related benefits - including cleaner air and healthier populations - that help offset the costs, he added.
The federal government is planning to introduce legislation later this year that will require provinces to adopt some form of carbon pricing, or have imposed a federal levy with the revenues returned to the provincial government.
Critics worry the Liberal government's determination to proceed with climate-change policies will hurt the Canadian economy, given the Trump administration is headed in the opposite direction.
In a report released on Monday, the Conference Board of Canada said the economic cost to Canada of achieving its 2030 target would be manageable, though clearly provinces such as Alberta and Saskatchewan face steeper costs than others.
"A lot of Canadian businesses are worried about what are the economic consequences of carbon pricing," said Craig Alexander, chief economist at the Conference Board, a non-profit research company. "What is it going to do to our competitiveness?" He said the overall impact on economic growth and jobs would be negligible, though energy-intensive industries such as chemicals, forest products, and oil and gas would feel a bigger bite.
However, Mr. Alexander said his forecast could not take into account technological change that would occur as a result of putting a price on carbon. He added that there are also longerterm costs to a "business-asusual" approach that must be considered.

Load-Date: April 12, 2017


End of Document




INTERPROVINCIAL POLITICS; Premiers endorse climate change plan; Canadian Energy Strategy represents a victory for alliance between Kathleen Wynne and Philippe Couillard
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
August 30, 2014 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 737 words
Byline: JANE TAER, SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: CHARLOTTETOWN, OTTAWA 
Body


Ontario and Quebec have seized the leadership of a long-promised Canadian energy strategy, shifting the focus to climate change and clean energy from the pipeline agenda.
At the closing session of their annual conference on Prince Edward Island, premiers released the outline of the Canadian Energy Strategy, which every one of them, including Quebec, has endorsed.
For Ontario Premier Kathleen Wynne and Quebec's Philippe Couillard this is a victory - the plan puts as much emphasis on addressing climate change as it does on the transport and transmission of energy.
Mr. Couillard had indicated he would support the strategy only if climate change and clean energy were included. At the closing news conference, he thanked his colleagues for their collaboration, noting they "made the essential link between environment and energy strategy."
He also announced he will play host to a climate-change summit next spring in Quebec and all of the premiers are invited.
For several years, the premiers were at odds over the strategy, which was being led by thenAlberta premier Alison Redford, who emphasized the oil sands and transporting oil and gas along pipelines.
At the premiers' meeting in Halifax two years ago, British Columbia's Christy Clark refused to participate in a national strategy because of a dispute with Ms. Redford over the Northern Gateway pipeline project. That was eventually resolved - but Pauline Marois, then Quebec's separatist premier, had refused to sign on.
Change in leadership - Ms. Marois and Ms. Redford are both gone now - has dramatically altered the dynamic around the premiers' table.
For Ms. Wynne, the agreement reached Friday is "probably the most significant thing that came out of this meeting."
"I think the fact of having a federalist premier [from Quebec] at the table to take part in something as significant as an energy strategy is a huge step forward," she said.
The document accompanying the announcement outlines the vision and principles of the Canadian Energy Strategy, stating that it should "reflect the shared values of Canadians; strengthen our economy and create jobs; identify opportunities to develop, transport, and transmit energy ... and maintain the highest degree of environmental safeguards and protection, including by addressing climate change, climate resilience and reducing greenhouse gas emissions globally."
The two premiers, both armed with new majority government mandates, laid the groundwork for a renewed push for a national energy strategy, with the climate change focus, last week at a bilateral meeting in Quebec City.
At that time they agreed to form a central Canadian alliance to push issues, including the energy strategy, with the other premiers - Mr. Couillard said the new alliance signalled the two provinces are "back as a very important bloc of influence in the country."
It was not clear whether they would be able to achieve their climate-change agenda given that the premiers from Alberta and Newfoundland and Labrador, the country's energy powerhouses, are only interim leaders. Also, New Brunswick's David Alward appeared only briefly because he is in the middle of an election campaign.
Ms. Wynne acknowledged there will be tensions between those provinces that want to focus on achieving progress on climate change, and western provinces that are eager to expand oil exports.
"I think that is tension that will continue to exist but the reason it is important to have a Canadian energy strategy is that we've got to manage that tension - it exists and we've got to deal with the realities of the oil sands, and we've got to deal with the realities of transporting that fuel, and we've got to deal with the realities of climate change," she told The Globe.
Each province will have to pursue its own climate-change reduction strategies, she said. But she also acknowledged that rising emissions from rapidly expanding oil sands will put more pressure on other industries and other provinces if the country is going to set and meet national targets. "But the oil sands are very important to the economic wellbeing of this country; there's no question about that," she said. "At this point in our history, we have businesses all across the country, we have businesses in Ontario that are dependent on the oil sands."
The Ontario Premier said she is convinced the industry is committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions on a per-barrel basis.

Load-Date: September 5, 2014


End of Document




On the issue of climate change, we are choking; OPINION
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 16, 2020 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 742 words
Byline: GARY MASON
Body


Lead
The viscid layer of smoke that had draped itself over much of southern British Columbia has slowly begun to dissipate thanks to a blast of cool Pacific air.
The air quality was so bad in Victoria, Vancouver and surrounding environs on the weekend and into Monday - the air ranked among the worst in the world in recent days - that people with underlying health conditions were urged to stay inside.
Texte/Text
Smoke caused by the historic wildfires raging south of the border blocked out the sun, helping cast an apocalyptic orange hue over the entire region.
Combined with the pandemic, it did feel like the end times.
Smoke from wildfires isn't new to British Columbia or Western Canada. According to the Canadian Disaster Database, the number of wildfire disasters in the country, primarily in the West, has been growing in recent decades, from less than 10 in the 1980s to more than 50 between 2011 and 2017. This year hasn't been nearly as bad, largely thanks to a wetter-than-normal June. But fires in California and the Western United States are now an annual event and getting worse by the year.
And despite what U.S. President Donald Trump might believe, there isn't a shred of doubt in the minds of scientists that climate change is the primary cause.
As we know, this is a global phenomenon. Australia recently suffered its worst wildfire season ever, with more than 18.6 million hectares torched, thousands of homes lost and billions of animals either killed, injured or displaced. Meantime, in Brazil, the Amazon remains ablaze, while a massive fire in its Pantanal wetlands region has been burning since mid-July.
Scientists have been warning about this day for ages. A warming planet would force a reckoning, they said. Well, we are living it now. The real tragedy? Our political leaders still aren't prepared to do anything about it.
In this country, the federal Liberals talk a good game, but haven't done much to bring down greenhouse-gas emissions.
Global News reported recently that the government was preparing a giant $100-billion program around climate change but shelved it amid concerns it would look as if they were taking advantage of the pandemic to execute their green agenda. It's hard to imagine being worried about that, though, as the world burns around them.
In B.C., not nearly enough is being done to deal with this crisis. Provincial forest-service budgets are increasingly being eaten up by the costs of fighting blazes, leaving less money to prevent them from happening in the first place. Meantime, the environmental organization Stand.earth revealed this week that B.C. is second only to Alberta in providing subsidies to the fossil-fuel industry, to the tune of a billion dollars a year. Think about that for a second. Another government that talks endlessly about wanting to save the planet but does very little about it.
I'd like to just fault politicians for a gross failure of leadership, but we are all to blame. We don't force the matter. Boomers are more than happy to let another generation deal with a problem primarily of their making.
The Moody's affiliate Four Twenty Seven put out a paper in August that said over the next two decades, climate change will increase the frequency of the wildfires we see now, causing unprecedented economic damage.
In the U.S., the health care costs linked to air pollution caused by forest fires are already more than US$100-billion annually, according to the data firm's report. Insurance rates are also going up as a result of the dangers forest fires pose to many communities.
People need to wake up to what's happening and demand more protective measures from governments. The dangers posed by forest fires are no different than those caused by rising sea levels or earthquakes. We are spending billions to raise seawalls and fortify buildings for the big one, yet many of our forests remain tinderboxes ready to explode.
Far more needs to be done to clear forests of the brush and vegetation that fuel many of the blazes. Fines for disobeying campfire edicts should be far more severe given what's at stake. Towns that are particularly vulnerable need better protection, possibly by moving tree lines back.
I recognize governments are challenged on many fronts these days. But the fact is wildfires are likely to only intensify as this country's climate warms at twice the rate of the global average.
Let's hope they - and we - don't wait to act until the home front is ash.

Load-Date: September 16, 2020


End of Document




Why the ROM is creating a climate-change curator
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 26, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: PURSUITS; Pg. P7
Length: 153 words
Body


Lead
Rodney, Elgin County, Ontario, Canada The end of the last Ice Age was a time of great climate change. The glaciers that covered the northern part of North America were receding.
As land was exposed, first in Southern Ontario around 14,500 years ago and later further north, plants and insects were probably the first recolonizers, with many animals soon to follow. Among the animals to recolonize Ontario was the American mastodont. There was also a new predator on the scene: humans. The combination of the warming climate, fragmentation of habitats and the presence of humans meant that this Ice Age species of elephant went extinct around 10,000 years ago, or possibly a little later. The ROM's specimen of the American mastodont was found by a farmer in October, 1911, in Ontario's Wainfleet Township. - David Evans, Temerty Chair, Vertebrate Palaeontology; Kevin Seymour, assistant curator, Vertebrate Palaeontology

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document




CHANGE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 17, 2020 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A12
Length: 104 words
Byline: Keith Stewart
Body


Lead
Since the pandemic, senior federal officials have found time to meet hundreds of times with oil lobbyists. Yet they haven't engaged with the majority of Canadians who tell pollsters they want climate action to be an integral part of the government's recovery strategy, and who have some innovative ideas on how we can build back better. We have an opportunity to come out of this crisis with a more resilient, equitable and caring country to deal with the continuing and interlinked crises of climate change, biodiversity destruction and rising inequality. Let's not blow it.
Senior energy analyst, Greenpeace Canada; Toronto

Load-Date: July 17, 2020


End of Document




UN official warns of climate-change cost; Environment Programme head says prevention is cheaper than adaptation, days after Trump's pledge to pull U.S. out of Paris accord
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 5, 2017 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 724 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY, Staff
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


Failure in the battle to restrain global climate change will entail more costly and devastating impact than any effort to transition off fossil fuels, the head of United Nations Environment Programme warned Sunday.
UNEP executive director Erik Solheim is in Canada to mark World Environment Day on Monday in an event in Niagara Falls, Ont., with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. He arrived just days after U.S. President Donald Trump announced he would pull the United States out of the Paris agreement because, the President said, it would result in the loss of American jobs.
Mr. Solheim said the world is already seeing costly effects of a changing climate - from flooding to drought in some of the world's poorest countries such as Somalia. And that impact will intensify and reach catastrophic levels if the world does not work together to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that result from the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas, he said in a telephone interview from Toronto.
"It was argued in the United States last week that there are enormous costs related to climate action. The opposite is of course true: There are enormous costs to non-action," said Mr. Solheim, a former Norwegian environment minister.
Mr. Solheim will join Mr. Trudeau and Environment Minister Catherine McKenna for a World Environment Day event, where the Canadian politicians plan to paddle a canoe on the Niagara River to highlight the benefits of connecting with and protecting nature.
Ms. McKenna insists Canada will continue to show leadership on climate change and the broader environmental agenda, both at home and internationally.
Critics within the environmental community have questioned that leadership after the government approved expansion of two oil-export pipelines last year that will facilitate expansion of the oil sands in Alberta, while conservative opponents argue Ottawa is moving too aggressively with measures such as carbon levies and regulation, especially in light of Mr. Trump's deregulation push.
Ms. McKenna argues there is economic opportunity for Canada in the global transition from fossil fuels to lower-carbon sources. "If the U.S. is going to step back, we're going to step in," she told CTV's Question Period in an interview that aired Sunday.
She rejected Mr. Trump's call for a new deal that would be fairer to the United States. "You can't renegotiate the Paris accord; it's in force," she said. The Group of Seven environment ministers - including Scott Pruitt, head of the Environmental Protection Agency - are scheduled to meet in Rome this weekend.
Mr. Solheim said it is important to recognize the economic costs of global warming, as well as from other types of pollution that can cause health impacts and the degradation of natural ecosystems.
In a report issued last week, the Winnipeg-based International Institute for Sustainable Development calculated that the known costs of various types of pollution in Canada - including climate change - is $39-billion a year, or roughly $1,100 for every Canadian.
The past two years have been the hottest on record and scientists forecast accelerating warming caused by the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will bring extreme storms, intensive hurricanes and devastating droughts, especially in arid regions near the equator. As well, they predict rising sea levels that would flood low-lying coastal areas, from south Florida to Bangladesh, and inundate island states.
All that impact - which can be moderated through a concerted effort to reduce GHGs - carries enormous economic costs, Mr. Solheim noted.
"If you look at the economy, prevention is always much, much, much cheaper than carrying the costs" of adaptation to climate change, he said.
Despite the setback for the Paris accord from Washington, the former Norwegian politician said he remains optimistic that the world will cut GHG emission and avert the most catastrophic impact of climate change.
"It's clearly a negative decision made by the President of the United States, but the impact will be much less than people tend to believe," he said.
He said other major emitting countries, including China and India, have served notice they won't back away from their commitments, as has Canada, which, while a small percentage of global emissions, is among the largest on a per-capita basis.

Load-Date: June 5, 2017


End of Document




The fallout of global warming: 1,000 years; In stark terms, scientists confirm that climate change is 'unequivocal'
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 31, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 935 words
Byline: MARTIN MITTELSTAEDT, ENVIRONMENT REPORTER
Body


 Humans have already caused so much damage to the atmosphere that the effects of global warming will last for more than 1,000 years, according to a summary of a climate-change report being prepared by the world's leading scientists. 
 The draft, seen by The Globe and Mail yesterday, also says evidence the world is heating up is now so strong it is "unequivocal" and predicts more frequent heat waves, droughts and rain storms, as well as more violent typhoons and hurricanes. It concludes the higher temperatures observed during the past 50 years are so dramatically different from anything in the climate record that the last half-century period was likely the hottest in at least the past 1,300 years. 
 Moreover, 11 of the past 12 years rank among the warmest since humans began taking accurate temperature measurements in the 1850s, a record of extremes so pronounced it is unlikely to be due to chance. 
 "Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, melting of snow and ice, and rising sea level," says the draft, which is being reviewed in Paris before its formal release Friday by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
 The draft also makes projections of how the climate is likely to change over this century: 
 *  Sea ice will shrink in both the Arctic and Antarctic, and late summer sea ice in the Arctic could disappear almost entirely by the latter part of the 21st century; 
 *  Heat waves and storms involving heavy precipitation will continue to become more common, as will droughts; 
 *  The number of hurricanes will decrease, but the ones that do occur will be more powerful; 
 *  Ocean currents responsible for such things as the Gulf Stream will slow, possibly by as much as 25 per cent. The report said it's "very unlikely" that currents will have abrupt changes during the 21st century, but longer-term alterations "cannot be assessed with confidence." 
 *  Global temperatures in 2090-99 are likely to be 1.7 degrees to 4 degrees warmer than the period from 1980-1999; 
 *  Current models suggest global warming of 1.9 to 4.6 degrees would lead to a "virtually complete" elimination of the Greenland ice sheet and a rise in sea levels of about 7 metres, if sustained for millennia; 
 *  Sea levels will probably rise from between 0.28 metres and 0.43 metres, although there is a chance the increase will be larger if Greenland and Antarctic ice discharges continue to grow. 
 The IPCC report is the fourth to be issued by the UN-organized group of scientists, and draws on contributions of about 2,000 top experts from around the world, including many from Canada. 
 The panel's findings have evolved since the first was issued in 1990, becoming more confident over time that human activity - mainly the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, and large-scale agriculture - have been causing profound changes on the climate. 
 The first report suggested global warming might be happening. The second, in 1995, said it was likely to be under way, while the third, in 2001, had a tone that indicated scientists were pretty sure they were seeing humanity's fingerprints on changes in climate. 
 Given the stark tenor of the draft scientists are now considering, they seem absolutely sure that climate change is happening. 
 The projection that human influence on the atmosphere during the 21st century will contribute to warming for more than 1,000 years is based on estimates for how long it will take nature to remove global-warming gases from the air. 
 The draft says evidence of warming is now being found almost everywhere in the world, from the tops of mountains, where glaciers are in retreat, to ocean deeps, where the average water temperatures have increased all the way down to depths of 3,000 metres because of the warming effect of a hotter atmosphere. 
 Some environmentalists are predicting that a strongly worded IPCC report will dispel any lingering doubts that global warming is really happening, and are calling on politicians to start taking more sweeping action to limit emissions of the greenhouse gases blamed for climate change.
 "There is no more reason to delay," said John Bennett, spokesman for the Climate Action Network Canada. "We need the policies, regulations, and programs to reduce emissions and we need to do it with the same kind of urgency that we would use to fight a war." 
 The United Nations' top environment official is calling for an emergency climate-change summit later this year. 
 The IPCC report will be issued in four instalments over the course of the year. The first section, now being prepared, deals with all new scientific evidence assembled since 2001 on how the world's climate has been changing. The others will deal with specific topics, such as how humans can adapt to climate change and mitigate its effects. 
 The draft says concentrations of two main greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide and methane, "far exceed" anything seen over the past 650,000 years, based on data that reconstructed the atmospheric composition of earlier times using air bubbles contained in ice cores. 
 The changes to the atmosphere are so large the scientists estimate that warming due to human-caused increases in greenhouse gases are at least five times larger than natural changes caused by normal alterations in output of solar energy from the sun. 
 Although the draft doesn't mention Canada directly, it says average Arctic temperatures have experienced a far sharper rise than elsewhere on the planet, increasing at a rate over the past 100 years that is double the global average.

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: January 31, 2007


End of Document




McEwan in three scenes; The author tells Elizabeth Renzetti his new novel is about climate change, and the weakness of human nature The author tells Elizabeth Renzetti his new novel is about climate change, and the weakness of human nature
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 17, 2010 Saturday


Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: WEEKEND REVIEW; BOOKS / INTERVIEW; Pg. R1
Length: 1336 words
Byline: ELIZABETH RENZETTI
Body


 Scene One 
 Potsdam, Germany 
 Fall 2007 
 The great and glorious gathered in the German city to discuss climate change in the autumn of 2007, settling in after their supper to listen to a slender man with thinning grey hair and a tendency to feline smiles. He was being offered, in his mind, as "an after-dinner mint." He was the only person to address the room who had not won a Nobel Prize - the conference's weighty title, Global Sustainability: A Nobel Cause, nodded to the attendees' accomplishments. 
 Ian McEwan surveyed his black-tie audience, thinking to himself that they looked like a colony of great, elderly penguins. Until this point, the only Nobel laureates he'd known were poets or playwrights, modest, unassuming men. These scientists and mathematicians were different; some were grumpy, others charming, but all were grand, self-important, heavy with the weight of their reputations and intellectual achievement. McEwan watched them but his mind was on his next novel, as a writer's always is. He had found a key. In his next book, he thought, the main character is going to have a Nobel Prize. 
 And so was born Michael Beard, the (anti-) hero of McEwan's new book Solar, a fat, philandering, potato-chip loving physicist with all his glory behind him and nothing but trouble ahead. A Nobel win for his work on photovoltaics while still in his 20s did not help Beard become any more noble. 
 While Solar has been labelled a climate-change novel - Beard is developing an artificial photosynthesis process, using stolen research - it's really about the weakness of human nature, the missing rungs between our best intentions and our feeble actions. 
 "We are all made of crooked grain," says McEwan, 61, with one of those feline smiles. 
 The author tells Elizabeth Renzetti his new novel is about climate change, and the weakness of 
 human nature 
 "We're funny and horrifying by equal turns. But I'd say the spirit of the book is benign tolerance." He's sitting in the living room of his lovely, quiet house in central London, with its dark, slightly sinister artwork and its weighty reading material (Colm Toibin, the Times Literary Supplement). It's almost a parody of a serious writer's house: How nice it would be to show up and find the table littered with copies of Hello! Magazine and a half-finished Slurpee. 
 But McEwan's writing is not merely drawn in shades of black. There's always been humour in his novels. (The Innocent, for example, contains one of literature's funniest accounts of chopping up a human body.) Solar is definitely on the comic end of the spectrum. Its author realized early on that "a novel that's going to bemoan our fate and beat the reader around the shoulders is going to die under its moral weight." Laughter was the way through: In Solar, someone almost loses his manhood to frostbite and someone else is ushered to his death by a bearskin rug, to great comic effect. Well, it is an Ian McEwan novel. 
 Scene Two 
 Spitsbergen, Norway, just north of the 79th parallel 
 March 2005 
 There was chaos in the ship's boot room. McEwan couldn't find his boots or gloves - how could he go outside and make snow sculptures in minus-30 temperatures if someone pinched his gear? 
 Aboard the ship Noorderlicht, locked in the ice at the top of Norway, McEwan was one of a dozen artists invited by the Cape Farewell project to visit the far north and ponder the effects of climate change. Instead, McEwan pondered where his stuff had gone, which of his high-minded fellow travellers had walked off with it, and how could it ever be possible to put the planet in order when fewer than two dozen people - much-honoured sculptors, decorated choreographers - couldn't even keep one room tidy, and their mitts to themselves? One of the first of his novel's puzzles had been unlocked. 
 "Everyone was aware of the paradoxes by which we all had to consume a great deal of energy to be kept alive in the cold," McEwan says, "and everyone knew that there was a sort of dissonance between the idealism of our talk and the ballooning chaos of the boot room." 
 It was too good a metaphor not to store for use later: In Solar, Michael Beard, caring little about climate change or art, on the run from his fifth divorce and various acts of larceny, watches the disintegration: "Four days ago the room had started out in orderly condition.... Finite resources, equally shared, in the golden age of not so long ago. Now it was a ruin." (If you're to believe reports in the British press, always a dangerous prospect, some of McEwan's Cape Farewell colleagues were less than gruntled about this satirical response.) 
 Best not to mention the British press at all, who are also lampooned in Solar, and are probably nightly going through his recycling boxes to ensure that his cardboard and lettuce leaves don't touch. The press has been a sore spot since a trumped-up controversy over whether the novelist borrowed some historical facts from a Second World War memoir for his 2001 bestseller, Atonement. 
 "Rackety" is McEwan's word for the tabloid press, and he uses it again to describe the increasingly polarized debate around climate change. Like it or not, his novel has arrived at a white-hot time. There's the controversy over flawed glacier data, as well as the furor over e-mails at the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia (the school where McEwan studied creative writing, incidentally, after discarding the idea of becoming a scientist). Polls show that belief in global warming is slipping, despite all the evidence to the contrary. As he was finishing Solar, the Copenhagen conference was staggering to its ineffectual finish, and McEwan changed the ending of his novel to reflect it. 
 "The world has become a lot more argumentative and rackety and instant," he says. "Climate-change debate has become tinged with road rage, especially on the denialist side." It's a combustible time. Bad news for the planet, probably. Good news for a novelist. 
 Scene Three 
 Lordsburg, New Mexico 
 2009 
 As he drove around the deserts of the U.S. southwest, McEwan was halfway through the story of Michael Beard and still had no idea where it would go. Aspiring writers, take note: Even novelists with 13 titles under their belts and shelves full of shiny trophies sometimes flail in the depths. 
 Then he came upon Lordsburg, population 3,390, tucked in the bottom corner of New Mexico, and knew that this was where all of Michael Beard's travails and sorrows and skirt-chasing would end in a perfect, stabbing point. McEwan found a charming family restaurant that he particularly liked, which, in fictional form, became the refuge for Beard's monstrous appetites, in one memorable feast. 
 "Did you like that?" he says, laughing. "That meal was completely invented! Layers of chicken, interspersed with steak, wrapped in bacon, smothered in cheese." 
 There's likely another reason why McEwan chose to end the novel in New Mexico; it was the birthplace of the atomic bomb. As a youngster, like many of the duck-and-cover generation, he was preoccupied with the threat of nuclear war. One of the threads running through Solar is the idea that every civilization becomes obsessed with the apocalypse, and harbours a solipsistic belief that it will be the last to inhabit the planet. Climate change is only the latest knife hanging over our heads. 
 "We like to think we're living in darkest days. People do feel a satisfaction that their own end is tied up with the end of the world - perhaps it gives a bit more meaning to our existence." It's clear which side of the debate McEwan falls on, but he's no proselytizer. There is enough of the latent scientist in him to resist the call to melodrama: "You have to careful you're not just stroking yourself with the idea that the Earth is as mortal as you are." 
Ian McEwan talks with Ian Brown at The Globe and Mail Open House Festival tomorrow in Toronto. The festival continues to April 30. For information, visit www.randomhouse.ca
/openhouse. 

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document




Budget deep freeze will lead to shutting of polar research lab; Critics say end to funding indicates Tories' skepticism of climate-change science
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
March 10, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; GLOBAL WARMING / 'THERE IS NOWHERE TO APPLY FOR MORE MONEY'; Pg. A4
Length: 665 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


 Scientists who study climate change from a remote post on Ellesmere Island are planning to shut down their cash-strapped project after the federal government refused to refinance a key climate-change research foundation. 
 The Polar Environment Atmospheric Research Laboratory (PEARL) is located 1,100 kilometres from the North Pole, and collects data on the changing climate of the Far North, where global warming is found to be most intense. 
 But in a conference call this week, PEARL scientists were not discussing their findings but were making plans to shut down the lab, including complicated arrangements to air lift out their equipment. 
 In its budget last week, the Harper government provided no new money for the Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmosphere Sciences. The foundation is the country's main fund for scientists studying everything from global climate models, to the melting of polar ice and frequency of Arctic storms, to prairie droughts and shrinking Rocky Mountain glaciers. 
 For many in the research community, the budget decision merely confirmed the view that Prime Minister Stephen Harper and his government remain skeptical of climate-change science and hostile to those who provide evidence that aggressive action must be taken to avert catastrophic global warming. 
 "It's quite clear we have a government that says they believe this is an issue but really don't care about it," said Andrew Weaver, a world-renowned climatologist from the University of Victoria. 
 "It's quite clear by their actions with [the climate foundation] and its lack of funding that they're basically saying, 'We don't want your science any more.' " 
 The foundation was endowed with $110-million nearly 10 years ago under the former Liberal government, but will run out of money by early 2011. As a result, scientists must wind up their projects. 
 "There is nowhere to apply for more money," said James Drummond, a Dalhousie University physicist who is principal investigator for the PEARL project. 
 He said the government is financing research infrastructure but not providing support for salaries and operational expenses. His network has already lost several colleagues and more are planning to leave the country. "It's like a family that needs a new car and you buy them a Ferrari. But they can't afford the insurance, they can't afford the gas, and they can't afford the maintenance. So what good's the Ferrari?" 
 Environment Minister Jim Prentice insists the government remains committed to basic research on climate change. He said the foundation has been operating for 10 years and it is now time to assess its work. 
 "We think it is appropriate that the foundation report to the government on the progress it has made, how those dollars were invested and what we've learned from the research that was done," he said. 
 Mr. Prentice said the government has other avenues for financing research on climate change - including the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the government's often-touted High Arctic research station. But that facility won't be ready for several years. Climate scientists said that as the funding dries up, the country's capacity to make use of the station will be lost. 
 Liberal environment critic David McGuinty said the Harper government is taking its cue from the climate-change skeptics, who have seized on some embarrassing e-mails from a British university in East Anglia to suggest researchers are rigging their results. 
 The Liberal critic said the scientific evidence overwhelmingly indicates that man-made climate change is real and poses a serious challenge to the global community. 
 The funding crunch "is unfortunate at a time when we should be investigating more, getting more evidence," Mr. McGuinty said. 
 "If we find out it's not as bad as we thought, we take a mid-course action. If we find out it's worse than we thought, we take mid-course correction. It's a never ending quest for knowledge and understanding." 

Load-Date: March 10, 2010


End of Document




Denial is no longer an option, UN panel says; The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a group of the world's top climate scientists sponsored by the United Nations, has released a 30-page synopsis of its report on the physical science of climate change. Paul Koring looks at the four main takeaways
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 28, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; FOLIO: CLIMATE CHANGE; Pg. A12
Length: 512 words
Byline: Paul Koring
Body


1. The situation is man-made - and dire
 Modern human civilization burning vast reserves of fossil fuels - billions of tonnes of oil and coal - is heating the planet so it's already hotter than any time since the last ice age. With new and unprecedented certainty - a confidence level above 95 per cent, which is science-speak for near certainty - experts agree that humans are driving rapid climate change. Greenhouse-gas emissions from modern industrial activity have caused "half of the observed increase in global average surface temperatures since the 1950s," concludes the latest and most dire report yet from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. "Warming of the climate system is unequivocal ... and unprecedented over decades to millennia." 
2.  Weather will get more extreme
 Linking weather events - Superstorm Sandy slamming the U.S. Northeast, massive flooding in Europe, raging heat igniting fires across northern Russia - to the inexorable planetary heating remains imprecise. But the frequency and severity of extreme weather in recent years points to new instabilities in the global patterns of ocean currents and atmospheric jet streams. More and worse weather extremes can be expected. 
3.  It will take centuries to fix, at least
 Even if further greenhouse-gas emissions - notably carbon dioxide - could somehow be stopped overnight, the lingering consequences of atmospheric loadings already in place will send global temperatures higher for centuries, at least. Even couched in the dispassionate terms of science, the outlook is grim: "Most aspects of climate change will persist for many centuries even if emissions of CO2 are stopped." As much as 40 per cent of some greenhouse gases will last for 1,000 years in the atmosphere, and - even with drastic reductions - the report concludes that rising sea levels are "virtually certain" far beyond 2100 from heat already in the global system. New York City, Shanghai and dozens of other coastal cities that are home to hundreds of millions of people will need massive, expensive protections. 
4.  Much is still unknown or uncertain
 It remains unknown whether warming will eventually undermine the vast Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets, sending them sliding into the sea - although, even at vastly accelerated rates, that could take centuries. The consequences would be sea levels rising by many metres and the disruption of huge, globe-girdling ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream. 
 The report says the "tipping points" in Earth's complex climate system still can't be defined. But, the panel warns, attempts at geo-engineering - the stuff of science fiction like space umbrellas that block sunlight from reaching Earth to cool an overheating planet or new technologies to suck carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and sequestrate it underground - may pose unfathomable risks even as they offer ways to remediate inevitable damage. Whether halting the heat will come too late for many species - from coral reefs cooked by hotter water to polar bears doomed by a lack of sea ice - is also unknown. 

Load-Date: September 28, 2013


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Canada not ready for climate change, report warns
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 31, 2016 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2016 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 787 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


Canada is ill-prepared for the increased flooding and extreme weather that will occur under climate change, and needs to act now or face much higher costs to fix damaged buildings and infrastructure in the future, a new report warns.
The federal government is set to announce major infrastructure programs in its fall update Tuesday, but Ottawa and the provinces have yet to properly assess how to make the country's transportation, electricity and water systems more resilient to the threat from climate change, the University of Waterloo's Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation says in a report to be released Monday.
The Intact Centre evaluated provincial efforts to mitigate disasters from the flooding that will be caused by extreme weather and rising sea levels. It concludes that, on the whole, Canada is not well-prepared and must take concerted action to reduce the threat that will escalate over time.
"The one factor that is not well understood in Canada is that every day we don't adapt is a day we don't have," said Blair Feltmate, the centre's head and a professor in the faculty of environment at the university.
"We do not have the luxury of time; we've got to move on this file immediately. ... We must build adaptation into the system now because if we don't, the economic consequences and the social disruption it's going to bring to the country will be very substantial."
Prof. Feltmate said the cost preparing for natural disasters is relatively modest for new construction, while it is far more expensive to protect existing buildings and infrastructure such as power and water systems and housing subdivisions - though retrofitting may be less costly than paying for damages from extreme weather.
His report card on the provinces and the Yukon comes as federal, provincial and territorial governments work toward a pan-Canadian climate strategy, with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau scheduling a first ministers meeting for Dec. 9, when he hopes to conclude a deal.
Ottawa also pledged under the Paris climate agreement last December to prepare a national adaptation plan and communicate it to the United Nations with regular updates. This year's UN climate summit starts next week in Morocco, and Environment Minister Catherine McKenna is expected to provide an update on Canada's progress in implementing the 2015 agreement.
The Prime Minister and premiers agreed in Vancouver last March to work toward an agreement that would not only reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but would co-ordinate increasing efforts to mitigate the impacts of extreme-weather events that are expected to increase in intensity and frequency.
A report from a federal-provincial-territorial working group said climate impacts are already being felt across Canada and "pose significant risks to communities, health and well-being,
the economy and the natural environment." The interim report was completed in June and recently obtained by The Globe and Mail; a final version is due to be released in the coming weeks.
The June report suggests governments are planning to embrace both short-term and long-term "adaptation" measures, including ensuring climate change is considered in infrastructure decisions and investing in projects that are specifically designed to address its impacts.
Over the longer term, Canada needs to develop "authoritative, accessible and actionable information" on changing climate conditions, and to generate greater awareness, leadership and investment in adaptation, the working group paper said.
But that high-level commitment can get lost in the day-today business of building infrastructure and planning new subdivision or commercial buildings, Prof. Feltmate said.
The insurance industry is particularly concerned about rising costs for flood and other weather-related disasters, including this year's devastating fire in Fort McMurray, Alta. Payouts have soared and seven of the past eight years have seen insured costs from natural disasters exceeding $1-billion.
Prof. Feltmate's report surveyed each province and the Yukon on 12 factors related to preparedness to limit flood damage. They included floodplain mapping and land-use planning; the availability of home adaptation audits and commercial property; and climate-related assessments of transportation, energy, drinking water and sewage systems.
He urged Ottawa and the provinces to each create a position of "chief adaptation officer," whose mandate would be to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses in flood preparedness and produce regular audits of the jurisdiction's commitments and actions. He also recommended provinces restrict construction on flood plains, and where such building has occurred, take action to limit potential flood damage.

Load-Date: October 31, 2016


End of Document




Climate-change alarmism is blinding us to sensible solutions; OPINION
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 18, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O11
Length: 961 words
Byline: BJORN LOMBORG
Body


Lead
President of the Copenhagen Consensus and visiting fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. This piece is adapted from his new book, False Alarm: How Climate Change Panic Costs Us Trillions, Hurts the Poor, and Fails to Fix the Planet.
It wasn't that long ago when much of the global elite had conclusively decided that climate change was our world's top priority. Then came a massive sideswiping by a global pandemic, of which we have only seen the first wave, along with an equally massive global recession. It serves as a timely reminder that an alarmism that cultivates one fear over others serves society poorly.
Texte/Text
In the "BC" era - Before Coronavirus - the World Health Organization famously called climate change the "greatest threat to global health in the 21st century."
Even as coronavirus tentacles were already spreading, the glitterati gathered in Davos this January and declared climate accounted for all the long-term biggest risks to the world.
The media happily recounted a steady stream of catastrophic climate scenarios. Campaigners found climate dystopias excellent for fundraising. Politicians in search of votes promised to save us from climate harm with everstricter emission regulations.
Not surprisingly, these persistent scare stories have convinced many that the climatic end-ofthe-world is nigh. One survey of 28 countries shows that almost half of all people believe climate change will likely lead to the extinction of the human race.
Global warming is a real challenge and a problem we need to tackle. But the alarmism makes it difficult for us to think smartly about climate solutions and it diverts our attention away from the many other important global issues.
Even before the coronavirus, this panic was vastly exaggerated.
The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change itself points out that, if we try to measure all the negative economic effects from climate change, it would be equivalent to reducing the average person's income in the 2070s by just 0.2 per cent to 2 per cent.
And this is from a base whereby the UN expects the average person in the 2070s to have an income 363 per cent higher than today's income (accounting for inflation). So even the worst outcome of global warming will mean that we will be "only" 356 per cent richer than today. That is a problem, but not the end of the world.
Take the very real problem of sea level rise. This is often portrayed in near-apocalyptic terms.
We recently have been treated to widespread reports that oceans could end up rising much more than what the UN climate panel tells us, displacing an astonishing 187 million people. Bloomberg News declared that coastal cities such as Miami may "drown in 80 years."
In reality, the 187 million number assumes that, for the next 80 years, nobody in the world will do anything to deal with the rising waters. In real life, of course, countries adapt. The very study that gave the 187 million number also shows that with adaptation, such as protection with dikes or seawalls, the number of people who have to move by the end of the century is just 305,000. The number that made it around the world was exaggerated 600 times. For context, 305,000 people moving over the next 80 years is less than half the number of people that move out of California each year.
Moreover, the exclusive focus on climate change neglects that the world faces many other large challenges that we can engage in so much more effectively. Indeed, this is also what the vast majority of the world's poor tell us to focus on. When the UN asked almost 10 million people what they regarded as the world's top priorities, the vast majority - especially from the world's poor - emphasized better education, health care, jobs, government and nutrition. Climate ranked 16th out of 16 priorities - right after phone and internet access.
There is an amazing array of effective solutions to many of the world's ills. Nutrition is one of the world's top priorities and for good reason. Effective nutrition in the first two years of a child's life helps develop the brain, improves the educational impact and results in dramatically better-skilled adults. While nutrition only costs US$100 per child, it boosts the average child's lifetime income by US$4,500 in today's money. Essentially, it delivers a 45-to-1 return on investment.
The same can be said for many health interventions. While we obviously need to continue to address the coronavirus pandemic, let's remember that the world's leading infectious-disease killer is still tuberculosis. Tuberculosis is often overlooked, but it mostly kills adults in their prime and leaves children without parents.
Yet, for only US$6-billion a year, the world could save nearly 1.6 million people from dying annually. When my think tank, the Copenhagen Consensus, provided an analysis for philanthropist Bill Gates, he called the money he devoted to such disease prevention the "best investment I've ever made."
Of course, we still need to address climate. Research shows the most effective way is to dramatically increase investment in green research and development.
This could reduce the price of green energy below the costs of fossil fuels and make everyone switch. Because this would also be much cheaper than our current, ineffective policies that cost us hundreds of billions of dollars each year in subsidies for the current generation of ineffective renewables, our budgets would be able to tackle a much wider range of the world's top issues.
When false climate alarm makes us insist on invoking climate at every turn, we end up helping the world only a little at a very high cost. We can - and must - do more, better and faster.
Correction
Revision type: Modification
Revision date: Tuesday, July 21, 2020

Load-Date: July 21, 2020


End of Document




Folio: Environment; TROUBLED WATERS; A comprehensive review of Canada's freshwater ecosystems reveals rising threats from pollution, overuse, invasive species and climate change, among other problems. Yet, the biggest threat of all may be a lack of information that hinders effective regulation, Ivan Semeniuk reports
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 12, 2017 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 1551 words
Byline: Ivan Semeniuk, Staff
Body


With a mere 0.5 per cent of the world's population, Canada has jurisdiction over 20 per cent of the global freshwater supply - a vast and valuable resource that is largely taken for granted by those who depend on it.
Yet, according to the first national assessment of Canada's freshwater ecosystems in decades, there is plenty of cause for concern. Each of the country's 25 major watersheds is facing multiple environmental threats, while the data required to track changes and guide policy makers are surprisingly inaccessible or simply non-existent.
"We don't know the facts," said David Miller, president of World Wildlife Fund-Canada, the environmental advocacy organization that conducted the assessment. "It's a recipe for inaction."
Mr. Miller added that spotty and unco-ordinated monitoring coupled with the widespread image of a pristine Canadian wilderness has left the country ill-prepared to track and respond to the growing pressures that its aquatic ecosystems are now facing.
Four years in the making, the assessment is intended to provide a national snapshot of the state of Canada's water by assembling and comparing data on 167 subwatersheds.
Because such information is neither centralized nor maintained in a systematic way, the organization had to search out scores of disconnected datasets from federal, provincial and municipal sources, water boards, conservation authorities and private companies. The result is a patchwork mosaic that reveals high levels of disturbance to water in about one-third of the subwatersheds, roughly corresponding to regions with the highest population density, agricultural activity and resource development.
More surprising is a general lack of information on four key health indicators, including flow, water quality, fish and bottom-dwelling organisms that are sensitive to environmental change. The assessment finds that the data are deficient in 110 out of the 167 subwatersheds to form a baseline picture of ecosystem health, including in some relatively populated areas where freshwater is essential to communities, such as in southern Manitoba, Nova Scotia's Annapolis Valley or the Bruce region of Ontario.
The situation reflects the glaring absence of a standardized national water-monitoring program in a federal system where water has traditionally been regarded as a provincial or local matter. Yet, Canada's watersheds are clearly interconnected and facing threats, from climate change to invasive species, that pay no regard to political boundaries. The assessment includes recommendations for filing in the knowledge gap including a community based "citizen science" approach to data gathering. Yet, it also makes clear that there is a clear need for co-ordination and oversight at a national level, "If this can inspire the federal government to take a leadership role, that would be a good thing," said Allen Curry, scientific director of the Fredericton-based Canadian Rivers Institute and an adviser on the project.
Canada's balkanized water-management system makes it especially difficult to obtain data on freshwater that researchers say should be available to the public. Bureaucratic and proprietary barriers to access were the largest obstacles that the assessment's authors faced in assembling their water report card.
"Despite living in the era of Google, we literally had to phone or e-mail or just beg people to send us data," said Elizabeth Hendriks, who co-ordinated the WWF-Canada effort.
David Schindler, one of Canada's most highly regarded freshwater scientists and a professor emeritus at the University of Alberta, said the assessment highlights the problems that stem from Canada's lax regulation of its freshwater assets.
"We need standards, not guidelines, with some penalties for non-compliance," he said.
Three years ago, Dr. Schindler was among the experts involved in a review of freshwater monitoring in the United States - a national program managed by the U.S. Geological Survey that he suggests Canada would do well to emulate. If things continue as they are, he said, freshwater ecosystems are likely to face unprecedented change while Canadians are left in the dark about what is happening to their country's most important resource.
"Water - despite its theoretical abundance - is probably the biggest looming problem in Canada," he said.
1. Overall stress levels
The national assessment breaks Canada's water system into 167 subwatersheds and finds that nearly all of them are currently experiencing some form of environmental disturbance, with multiple threats at play in some of the most affected regions. The most at-risk areas tend to match up with higher population density, as well as significant farming and heavy industry activity.
Two regions - Eastern Lake Huron and the Lake Ontario and Niagara Peninsula subwatershed - share the dubious distinction of being the most disturbed in Canada because of a combination of seven threat factors, including high pollution levels, water use and fragmentation, among others shown in the accompanying maps.
2. Pollution
Pollution remains the most serious threat to freshwater in the short term. The assessment combines data on a variety of pollution sources to reveal a high degree of stress across nearly the full length of Canada's southern border. In many regions, point source pollution, including wastewater effluents, industrial discharges and urban runoff are the largest contributors while agricultural contamination, including nitrogen, phosphorus and pesticides, dominates in the Prairies and Southwestern Ontario. Two other sources - pipeline incident and pollution from transportation mishaps - mainly account for why the zone of very high stress reaches up into northern Alberta.
3. Alteration of flow
Large dams and reservoirs serve to disrupt the flooding cycles and variations in flow levels that are natural to all river systems. Among the 12 subwatersheds with very high alteration of flows is the Churchill River in Labrador, where the Muskrat Falls hydroelectric megaproject is located. Another is the La Grande subwatershed in Quebec, home to the largest hydroelectric station in Canada. While the majority of Canada's northern river systems are currently unaltered by dams, the picture could change dramatically in the future because of the central role hydroelectric power development is expected to play in helping Canada meet its greenhouse gas emission targets.
4. Water use
Most of Canada has not seen the removal of vast quantities of freshwater from ecosystems for agricultural production and other uses. But in 17 subwatersheds, the threat posed by the overuse of water is high or very high. These are located in prime agricultural lands along the South Saskatchewan and Assiniboine-Red River systems and in the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence regions. Many are part of the boundary waters that Canada shares with the United States. The analysis also includes water intake for drinking water, manufacturing and mining but not the oil and gas industry.
5. Habitat loss
The assessment shows a significant loss of ecosystems in more than half of Canada's 167 subwatersheds. In the southern part of the country, the decline is mainly attributed to conversion of natural landscapes into farmland, while in a broad swath of the north, from the Yukon to central Quebec, the main driver of habitat loss is forestry. In residential areas, impervious, artificial surfaces such as paved roads, driveways, parking lots and rooftops disrupt natural habitats while increasing the runoff of pollutants into watersheds.
6. Fragmentation of ecosystems
In addition to habitat loss, structures such as dams, roads and railways serve to divide freshwater ecosystems, impede migration of fish and other species and alter the flow of nutrients. The negative results includes a loss of genetic diversity in aquatic species. A total of 61 subwatersheds, mostly in southern Canada where roads are most numerous, show a very high loss of connectedness. In the North, logging and mining roads are the primary causes of fragmentation.
7. Invasive species
A growing influx of invasive plants and animals has reduced biodiversity and changed the balance of ecological communities in a number of subwatersheds, most notably in Southwestern Ontario where native species are already under high stress because of other risk factors. This threat was among the more challenging of the seven to measure because it is easier to demonstrate the presence rather than the absence of a non-native species. The threat level only indicates invasive species that are already known to be present in a given watershed, not those that pose likely future threats, such as Asian Carp in the Great Lakes.
8. Climate change
While climate change currently presents a low or moderate risk across most of Canada today, it is the stressor that is most likely to play a major role in watershed health in the future. Climate projections include more frequent extreme weather events such as flooding and severe droughts that will further tax water systems. More broadly, even small shifts in temperature and precipitation can translate into profound effects on flow rates and on the way ecosystems function. In terms of watershed health, climate change is expected to become important as an amplifier of other threats.

Load-Date: June 12, 2017


End of Document




Global warming critics appointed to science boards; Harper government's actions are 'dreadful' and undercut public pledges to tackle climate change, leading glaciologist says
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 11, 2009 Monday, National Edition


Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; ENVIRONMENT AND RESEARCH; Pg. A6
Length: 942 words
Byline: BILL CURRY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


 Top Canadian scientists are accusing the Harper government of politicizing science funding and jeopardizing climate research by naming global warming critics to key boards that fund science. 
 The government's actions are "dreadful," said Garry Clarke, a leading international glaciologist at the University of British Columbia, and undercut public pledges to tackle climate change. 
 "Their mouths are doing one thing and their hands are doing something different," Prof. Clarke said. 
 Already alarmed over funding cuts to basic research, scientists say two appointments in particular are worrisome. Mark Mullins, the executive director of the conservative-leaning Fraser Institute - and a former adviser to the Canadian Alliance Party - was recently appointed to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), which funds university research projects that have included studies on climate change. 
 Dr. Mullins is an economist and critic of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations-sanctioned scientific body that has authored warnings of floods, famine and extinctions that triggered political efforts around the world to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions. 
 More than 200 Canadian scientists have contributed to the IPCC's work and most of them are employed by the federal government. 
 The 18-member NSERC already includes another Harper government appointee, mathematician Christopher Essex, who wrote a book challenging the "myth of climate change."
 On the same day Dr. Mullins was appointed to NSERC, last month, another skeptic of global warming was appointed to the board of the Canada Foundation for Innovation, which funds large research projects. John Weissenberger is a close friend of Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a former chief of staff in the Harper government and a geologist who works for Husky Energy in Alberta. 
 Dr. Weissenberger has written opinion pieces in the media and on his Internet blog expressing his "skepticism about global warming." That and other comments by the two appointees on the public record were compiled by NDP researchers and verified by The Globe and Mail.
 Both Dr. Mullins and Dr. Weissenberger told The Globe and Mail they are well-qualified for the positions, and both said they have no intention of using the posts to advocate for reduced funding for climate science. 
 While both NSERC and the Canada Foundation for Innovation fund some climate-change research, climate scientists are particularly concerned that their main source of federal funding - the Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences - will have to shut its doors next year unless it receives new funding. 
 Prof. Clarke, who has co-authored IPCC reports, said "I don't see anything wrong with putting a Fraser Institute person in there. It's just when there's a sense that they're going to stack the deck that it becomes problematic." 
 University of Victoria climatologist Andrew Weaver, another lead author of past IPCC reports, said politics should be kept at a distance from these boards. He also said it is "very disturbing" that people who dispute global warming are making strategic decisions on scientific research. 
 "What would the public think if we appointed outspoken proponents of the fallacy 'smoking doesn't cause cancer' as members of the boards funding medical and, in particular, cancer research?" he said. 
 Bill Rodgers, a spokesman for Environment Minister Jim Prentice, declined comment on the individuals appointed. But he did say: "Since we took office in 2006, we have made no bones that climate change is one of the greatest challenges the world is facing."
 NDP MP Bill Siksay said the appointments highlight the need for the Conservatives to honour their 2006 pledge to have federal appointments reviewed by an independent commission. "This is a requirement in a democratic society to have that kind of oversight," he said.
***
The climate skeptics
 Dr. Mark Mullins, executive director of the Fraser Institute 
 The quote "It strikes me that the science is not settled," he said in a 2007 interview posted at BCbusinessonline. " 'Put caps on global emitters' is not the natural conclusion I would come to." 
 The appointment April, 2009. Dr. Mullins is one of 18 members of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), a body that makes strategic decisions on the agency's priorities. The granting agency funds university research. Specific projects are approved by a separate panel at arm's length from the council. 
 What he says now "I've got personal views on all kinds of things. I've never been asked for any of them in relation to this appointment and it's got no implications, I don't think, for any of the work that might be done there. We're not, as I understand it, vetting any sort of scientific research at the board level." 
 Dr. John Weissenberger, a geologist with Husky Energy and former chief of staff in the Harper government. 
 The quote "To those who doubt the scientific basis of global warming theory, we say: Don't let a cabal of government-funded scientists, environmental activists and journalists convince us they're the mainstream." - April 28, 2006, opinion piece co-authored in the Calgary Herald. 
 The appointment April, 2009. Dr. Weissenberger will work as one of 15 board members at the Canada Foundation for Innovation. The foundation helps fund the purchase of expensive research equipment. The board of directors makes final decisions on what to fund and sets strategic objectives.
 What he says now "My appointment should be judged based on my academic and professional qualifications." 
Bill Curry

Load-Date: May 11, 2009


End of Document




FORECAST / AIR; No easy breathing on health risks of climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 29, 2014 Tuesday, Atlantic Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 697 words
Byline: CARLY WEEKS
Body


This is part of a series examining the health repercussions for Canadians of a changing climate.
Asthma and allergy rates are on the rise across Canada, according to a chorus of environmental experts and advocacy groups. Mounting evidence shows that the hay-fever season now lasts up to a month longer than in the past, and parts of Canada that were once too cold for ragweed and other allergy-inducing plants are now seeing activity for the first time.
Although the research linking climate change to respiratory health risks is still a relatively new area of study compared with the damage air pollution causes to the heart, the available evidence has many concerned enough to act: This week, the Asthma Society of Canada will host its first national summit focusing on the environment, asthma and allergies, featuring Environment Minister Leona Aglukkaq as keynote speaker. (Ms. Aglukkaq declined a request for an interview.)
The conference comes as the Asthma Society of Canada is reinventing itself as an organization dually focused on the environment and health.
"[Asthma] is an environmentally related disease," said Robert Oliphant, president and CEO of the asthma society. "Our mandate is changing."
Already, Dr. Oliphant said, the rates of people with severe forms of asthma are climbing, and climate change will exacerbate symptoms in many, placing an added burden on the already stretched health-care system.
Dr. Oliphant noted that the most vulnerable Canadians, including families on low incomes and many aboriginal people (those who are more likely to live closer to industrial areas, highways or forests that could be swept by wildfire) are currently feeling the effects the most.
Canada's leading expert on the impacts of climate change on respiratory health, Michael Brauer, said increased pollen production and a longer hay-fever season will cause more allergy symptoms, leading to lost productivity and poor sleep in many individuals. While allergies might seem like a minor inconvenience, he said that hay fever can be "devastating" to those experiencing it. And as more people develop asthma and other respiratory problems because of climate change, the more the health-care system will feel the strain.
"This isn't trivial," said Dr. Brauer, a professor in the school of population and public health at the University of British Columbia. Part of the challenge, he said, is making people understand that regardless of where they live, they will feel the effects of climate change on respiratory health. And the case for taking action to stop or reverse these trends may be a hard sell, considering that it will likely take decades of work on issues such as reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and developing plans to reduce traffic congestion before real improvements in air quality are seen, Dr. Brauer said.
A paper published last year in the journal Chest declared that climate change "is a health threat no less consequential than cigarette smoking." Patients with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other lung problems will die earlier and be in worse health because of pollution, forest fires, pollen and floods, the authors say.
The risks are no longer theoretical, said Christopher Carlsten, associate professor and chair in occupational and environmental lung disease at the University of British Columbia. The challenge now, he said, is communicating these risks to the public.
Erika Ladouceur, 25, understands all too well. She has asthma, is allergic to dust and mould, and feels the effects of changes in humidity, smog and pollen. It affects her daily life and she fears it will only get worse as the climate continues to change. When Ms. Ladouceur lived in Montreal, she couldn't leave the house on days when it was smoggy. Now she lives in Victoria, where rain, mould and humidity cause her asthma to flare up. She must take asthma medication at least twice a day to control her symptoms and when it's humid, she often must take a steroidal drug.
"With more things happening and things changing, it means that people like me who are already sensitive are going to be affected even more," she said. "People need to realize that it is happening."

Load-Date: April 29, 2014


End of Document




No easy breathing on health risks of climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 29, 2014 Tuesday, National Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; FORECAST / AIR; Pg. A12
Length: 701 words
Byline: CARLY WEEKS
Body


This is part of a series examining the health repercussions for Canadians of a changing climate.
 Asthma and allergy rates are on the rise across Canada, according to a chorus of environmental experts and advocacy groups. Mounting evidence shows that the hay-fever season now lasts up to a month longer than in the past, and parts of Canada that were once too cold for ragweed and other allergy-inducing plants are now seeing activity for the first time. 
 Although the research linking climate change to respiratory health risks is still a relatively new area of study compared with the damage air pollution causes to the heart, the available evidence has many concerned enough to act: This week, the Asthma Society of Canada will host its first national summit focusing on the environment, asthma and allergies, featuring Environment Minister Leona Aglukkaq as keynote speaker. (Ms. Aglukkaq declined a request for an interview.) 
 The conference comes as the Asthma Society of Canada is reinventing itself as an organization dually focused on the environment and health. 
 "[Asthma] is an environmentally related disease," said Robert Oliphant, president and CEO of the asthma society. "Our mandate is changing." 
 Already, Dr. Oliphant said, the rates of people with severe forms of asthma are climbing, and climate change will exacerbate symptoms in many, placing an added burden on the already stretched health-care system. 
 Dr. Oliphant noted that the most vulnerable Canadians, including families on low incomes and many aboriginal people (those who are more likely to live closer to industrial areas, highways or forests that could be swept by wildfire) are currently feeling the effects the most. 
 Canada's leading expert on the impacts of climate change on respiratory health, Michael Brauer, said increased pollen production and a longer hay-fever season will cause more allergy symptoms, leading to lost productivity and poor sleep in many individuals. While allergies might seem like a minor inconvenience, he said that hay fever can be "devastating" to those experiencing it. And as more people develop asthma and other respiratory problems because of climate change, the more the health-care system will feel the strain. 
 "This isn't trivial," said Dr. Brauer, a professor in the school of population and public health at the University of British Columbia. Part of the challenge, he said, is making people understand that regardless of where they live, they will feel the effects of climate change on respiratory health. And the case for taking action to stop or reverse these trends may be a hard sell, considering that it will likely take decades of work on issues such as reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and developing plans to reduce traffic congestion before real improvements in air quality are seen, Dr. Brauer said. 
 A paper published last year in the journal Chest declared that climate change "is a health threat no less consequential than cigarette smoking." Patients with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other lung problems will die earlier and be in worse health because of pollution, forest fires, pollen and floods, the authors say. 
 The risks are no longer theoretical, said Christopher Carlsten, associate professor and chair in occupational and environmental lung disease at the University of British Columbia. The challenge now, he said, is communicating these risks to the public. 
 Erika Ladouceur, 25, understands all too well. She has asthma, is allergic to dust and mould, and feels the effects of changes in humidity, smog and pollen. It affects her daily life and she fears it will only get worse as the climate continues to change. When Ms. Ladouceur lived in Montreal, she couldn't leave the house on days when it was smoggy. Now she lives in Victoria, where rain, mould and humidity cause her asthma to flare up. She must take asthma medication at least twice a day to control her symptoms and when it's humid, she often must take a steroidal drug. 
 "With more things happening and things changing, it means that people like me who are already sensitive are going to be affected even more," she said. "People need to realize that it is happening." 

Load-Date: April 29, 2014


End of Document




Effects of warming could inundate planet; Climate change already harming many species, draft report says
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 4, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE; Pg. A5
Length: 1069 words
Byline: MARTIN MITTELSTAEDT, ENVIRONMENT REPORTER
Body


 Global warming could hit the entire world like a tsunami, wiping out thousands of species unable to adapt to a hotter climate and making billions of people vulnerable to water shortages and the inundation of coastal cities, says a draft summary of an authoritative UN sponsored report on climate change scheduled for release on Friday. 
 The summary also says there is a 90-per-cent likelihood that global warming is already beginning to change the world's rich biological heritage of fauna and flora, typified by such recently observed phenomena as the northward march of many animal and plant species. It says these types of changes are occurring almost everywhere scientists care to look, and are being caused by human activity. 
 "Many natural systems, on all continents and in some oceans, are being affected by regional climate changes, particularly temperature increase," the draft concluded. 
 It also forecasts a massive upheaval in the world's ecosystems, with as much as half the Arctic tundra being replaced by forest if warming reaches 4 degrees, a level of extreme heating that also has the potential to wipe out about 45 per cent of the Amazon's tree species.
 The report, by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, is the second instalment in a series of three widely anticipated studies on global warming to be issued this year by the body. The report is the collective work of more than 1,000 of the world's scientists, including many from Canada, and has a measured and cautious tone, despite its many dramatic conclusions.
 This new instalment outlines the far-reaching impact that global warming is already having and expected to have over the next few centuries on the world's environment, ranging from freshwater fish to mangroves and boreal forests.
 It also highlights the urgent need for countries to develop strategies for protecting their citizens against the adverse effects of living on a warmer planet, ranging from the instability a hotter world introduces to agriculture to having to deal with nuclear power plants built on coastlines that may end up underwater.
 But it also concludes that some of the most dire potential results of climate change, such as an abrupt halt to the current responsible for the Gulf Stream that gives Northern Europe its temperate weather, are unlikely to occur during this century. 
 The draft is being reviewed this week in Brussels by policy makers from more than 100 countries, and a summary of its findings will be issued on Friday morning, followed early next week by details on changes scientists expect to see in major regions of the world. 
 In February, the IPCC issued the first instalment, a review of the science supporting global warming. It concluded that the evidence indicating climate change is occurring, and due to human activity, has become so strong it is "unequivocal." 
 One of the most striking findings in the summary, a compendium of all of the significant scientific research on global warming's possible impacts conducted over the past five years, is the sheer magnitude of the number of people estimated to be negatively affected. 
 Sea level rise, for instance, is likely to turn into a slow-moving human disaster if nothing is done to protect islands and coastal areas from flooding, and could be a major problem lasting for centuries that affects hundreds of millions of people. 
 Although most climate-change models predict that sea level won't increase by more than 0.6 metres this century, the summary warned that the rise could be anywhere from four to six metres over the following centuries and millennia if global warming destabilizes the ice cap on Greenland and the West Antarctic ice sheet. It said there is about a 50-per-cent chance that there would be a partial meltdown of ice in the two areas if temperatures rise anywhere from 1.1 degree to 3.8 degrees. It termed this melting as leading to "the worst case scenario of abrupt sea level rise." 
 "Very large sea level rises that would result from widespread deglaciation of Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets imply major changes in coastlines and inundation of low-lying areas. . . . Relocating populations, economic activity and infrastructure would be costly and challenging," it said. 
 The summary said that by the end of this century, ecosystems are very likely to be exposed to the highest atmospheric carbon dioxide levels over the past 650,000 years and global average temperatures that are at least as high as any experienced in the past 740,000 years.
 By 2100, such a significant amount of the carbon dioxide that humans have added to the atmosphere is likely to have been dissolved into the oceans that they'll be the most acidic they've been in the past 20 million years, threatening sea life, such as animals whose shells would dissolve in this harsher environment, the report states. 
 Although many changes due to climate change are unambiguously bad, the summary presented a number of outcomes for agriculture and forestry that are more ambiguous. For instance, there is about a 50-per-cent chance that in temperate regions, including Canada, moderate warming will benefit cereal crops and pasture yields, but even slight warming decreases yields in tropical and dry areas. 
 "This will increase hunger, malnutrition and consequent disorders, including child growth and development, in particular in those regions that are already most vulnerable to food insecurity, notably Africa," it said. 
 Satellite observations since the 1980s have found that one of the benefits of global warming for agriculture in northern regions is that there has been an earlier greening in spring, leading to a longer growing season. 
 The summary said there is uncertainty over what will happen to the world's forest industry because of global warming. 
 Depending on the amount of warming this century, the report predicted that anywhere from 20 per cent to 30 per cent of the world's species will be at high risk of dying out with as little as a 1.5-degree increase, and "major extinctions around the globe" will occur if the temperature rise surpasses about 3 degrees. 
 "The resilience of many ecosystems [their ability to adapt naturally] is likely to be exceeded by 2100," it said, attributing this to "an unprecedented" combination of change in climate and disruptions warmer temperatures cause, such as increasing the number of insect pests and wildfires. 

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: April 4, 2007


End of Document




COVID-19 is intensifying divisiveness over Canada's approach to climate change; OPINION
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
August 8, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O3
Length: 856 words
Body


Lead
DATA DIVE WITH NIK NANOS Nik Nanos is the chief data scientist at Nanos Research, a global fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, a senior fellow at the University of Ottawa's Positive Energy Initiative and the official pollster for The Globe and Mail.
There's a school of thought that, when it comes to fighting climate change, the notions of a greener future and strong economic growth are irreconcilable. These are the people who insist you can't have your cake and eat it, too. Others insist you can have it all, and that it's indeed possible - if not paramount - to have both a healthy planet and a healthy economy.
Texte/Text
During the first 60 days of 2020, before the pandemic effectively closed the economy, Canadians said their most important issue of concern was the environment. Now, Canadians are not only more concerned about the pandemic (28.7 per cent), but also the state of the economy and the job market (20.8 per cent) and health care (9.6 per cent). Just 6.1 per cent of Canadians cite the environment.
However, the environment still looms as a longer-term issue that demands action. It is the timing and nature of this action that divides Canadians.
In a new survey by Nanos for the University of Ottawa's Positive Energy initiative, by a margin of 1.5 to 1, Canadians felt now is a good time for Canada to be ambitious in addressing climate change, even if there are costs to the economy. Forty-five per cent of Canadians rated it either a 7, 8, 9 or 10 on a scale out of 10, where 10 was absolutely the best time.
Meanwhile, 29 per cent of Canadians rated it a 0 to 3, where 0 is absolutely the worst time.
This means that, even though a plurality of Canadians currently tilts toward environmental ambition, it remains an extremely divisive issue with only about one out of four Canadians with an ambivalent opinion.
A look at the distribution of opinion suggests that one-third of Canadians are polarized at both extremes, with just as many Canadians thinking it is absolutely the worst time as Canadians thinking it is absolutely the best.
Canadians are also very divided by region. Quebec and the Prairies are polar opposites, with people in the Prairie provinces much more likely to say it is absolutely the worst time to address climate change, while Quebeckers are most likely to say it is the best time.
When asked to explain, Canadians who wanted to wait asserted that no action should be taken until the economy has recovered, and that there were other more important priorities such as health care and finding a vaccine for COVID-19. Those seeking immediate action believe that addressing climate change can't wait and that the pandemic is a good opportunity for change.
The research suggests the pandemic has had a material impact on the views Canadians have on what is more important - protecting the environment or growth and creating jobs. Nanos tracking for the University of Ottawa reveals that, in March, 2015, 67 per cent of Canadians felt that "protecting the environment should be given priority, even if it causes slower economic growth and some loss of jobs," whereas 24 per cent said "growth and creating jobs should be the top priority, even if environment suffers to some extent." In July, 2020, those numbers had narrowed dramatically - 49 per cent and 39 per cent, respectively.
When it comes to striking a balance and coming up with solutions to support both the environment and the economy, most Canadians believe the federal government should take the lead. About two out of three Canadians believe the federal government, not the provinces, should lead decision-making when it comes to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. This is true in every region, except the Prairies.
These are the views based on research conducted during the pandemic. And they contrast with the views held before the pandemic. The question now is: How will changes in the economy, and the fight against COVID-19, continue to influence the views of Canadians as to whether this is a good time to be more ambitious on the environment?
Canadians are gripped with economic uncertainty because of the pandemic. This is increasing their polarization when it comes to reconciling the environment and the economy. The recordhigh identification of the environment as a top issue of concern coincided with an exceptionally low unemployment rate and a steady economy.
In this moment of fragility, our ability to restore economic prosperity may be a key factor in determining whether Canadians support immediate action on the environment. It's too early to tell whether Canadians can have their cake and eat it, too.
This column was based on multiple research studies completed by Nanos Research.
They were all national random surveys of Canadians composed of at least 1,000 individuals.
Random studies of 1,000 are accurate within 3.1 percentage points, 19 times out of 20. The reports with full methodologies and their technical notes are posted at www.nanos.co.
Canadians on climate change TIME TO ADDRESS CLIMATE CHANGE Is it a good time for Canada to be ambitious in addressing climate change?

Load-Date: August 8, 2020


End of Document




NATURE ON THE MOVE; Disease-carrying pests and toxic weeds are on the rise because of climate change and urbanization. As Wency Leung reports, it's time to get to know them
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 10, 2017 Monday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE & ARTS; Pg. L1
Length: 4203 words
Byline: Wenc Leung, Staff
Body


Rodents. Blood suckers. Toxic plants.
You don't need to venture far this summer to encounter potentially harmful fauna and flora.
They'll come to you.
Thanks to changes in the environment, such as urbanization and climate change, pests and invasive plants are multiplying and encroaching into new territory, bringing with them a variety of health risks.
The proliferation of blacklegged ticks, a relatively new species in Canada, for instance, has contributed to a surge in cases of Lyme disease, which, if left untreated, can lead to persistent symptoms, including severe headaches, neurological and cardiac problems.
According to federal government data, 987 cases of Lyme disease were reported last year, up from 144 cases in 2009.
Dr. Jianghong Wu at York University has been mapping the expansion of suitable habitats for blacklegged ticks in Canada and he notes these areas are expanding northward. Much of Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia and parts of Manitoba are favourable habitats, says Wu, the Canada Research Chair in Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
In Ontario, "it's not a matter of spreading now," he says. Rather, blacklegged ticks seem to be establishing themselves in certain areas, including Toronto, meaning they are thriving and their populations are increasing in density, thus raising your risk of encountering and getting bitten by one.
Meanwhile, local authorities in British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec warn of the potential dangers of giant hogweed, an invasive species that can lead to severe skin burns. While the noxious plant is mostly found in Ontario and in B.C.'s Lower Mainland, it appears to be spreading in Quebec and there have been a few isolated reports of it in the Maritimes, says Dr.
François Tardif, a professor of plant agriculture at the University of Guelph.
You don't even have to leave home to have an unwanted encounter. Media reports suggest rat populations in Vancouver and Toronto are exploding. Earlier this year, Ontario's Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care reported three human cases of Seoul virus infection, a type of hantavirus, linked to prolonged contact with rats. Although no serious health problems were reported, the ministry noted that in rare cases, infection can lead to a type of severe kidney disease. It urged people to educate themselves about rat-borne diseases and to take precautions if they come in contact with rats and contaminated materials.
Here, we zero in on four of the noxious encroachers you're most likely to meet this summer and how best to defend yourself against them.
RATS 9 Why they're a threat: Where there are people, there are rats. So with increased urbanization and cities becoming denser, rats are becoming a growing concern, says Dr. Chelsea Himsworth, assistant professor of the School of Population and Public Health at the University of British Columbia. "When there's more people, there's more resources, and then there's more rats."
In Canada, the most prevalent species are Norway rats and black rats, which are invasive species that actually originate from Asia, Himsworth says. (Norway rat is a misnomer.) But today, rats are found all over the world. Norway rats are a particularly robust and aggressive species, so they tend to displace black rats in territories where the two compete.
Rats can carry a wide variety of zoonotic diseases, or diseases that can be transmitted from animals to humans, including viruses, bacteria and parasites. Leptospirosis, for instance, is a known rat-borne bacterial disease that affects people who come in contact with rat urine.
But a recent finding from Himsworth's research shows rats can also carry human pathogens. So not only do they have their own rat-specific microbes, she says, "they act as this incredible sponge and they'll actually soak up the human-origin microbes ... and potentially propagate them and transmit them back."
She and her team found that rats in Vancouver carried human strains of the antibiotic-resistant staph bacteria MRSA and the diarrhea-causing Clostridium difficile.
In addition, the mental toll of experiencing a rat infestation is often neglected, Himsworth says. Living with rats can lead to anxiety and feelings of helplessness.
People living in impoverished inner-city communities are particularly vulnerable as they're often forced to live with infestations, she says.
How they spread disease: There are a number of ways in which rats transmit diseases to humans. The most obvious is by getting bitten by a rat. (The aptly named rat-bite fever, characterized by fever, vomiting and joint-and-muscle pain, is transmitted in this manner.)
"But what most people don't know is that you don't have to have direct contact at all," Himsworth says. "In fact, you don't even have to have seen a rat to potentially be exposed."
The majority of rat-borne diseases, she says, are transmitted through rat urine, feces and fleas.
Seoul virus, for instance, is spread not only by rat bites, but through exposure to urine, feces, saliva and contaminated bedding, according to the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.
Why they're tricky to tackle: Since rats may infect people with human diseases, it's likely impossible to know whether an infected person has caught his or her illness from a rat or another human, Himsworth says.
Moreover, physicians may misdiagnose patients with rat-borne illnesses if they're not aware of them or lack the tests to identify them.
Further complicating matters, the diseases that rats carry differ according to their geographical area and they can vary not only by city, but by city block, Himsworth says. That's because rats form tightly-knit family groups called colonies, which act almost as self-quarantining units. They have a small home range, usually less than a city block. And there's little to no contact between colonies, she says.
"That's interesting from a public health point of view because it suggests counterintuitively that your risk of getting disease from a rat is not proportional to the number of rats you're exposed to," she says.
In other words, you could stand in the middle of a colony of thousands of rats and not get sick. Conversely, you could happen to come into contact with urine from a single infected rat and become horribly ill.
Why you should leave it to the experts: If you have rats in your home, your instinct may be to just kill the critters. But hear Himsworth out before you start laying out traps.
Diseases are transmitted amongst rats through specific social interactions, she says, adding that rat groups are hierarchical. If you eliminate individual rats within a family group, it disturbs its family dynamics.
"Now they have to reorganize themselves," Himsworth says, noting that a frenzied scramble occurs. Rats that wouldn't normally interact start making contact with each other as they try to regroup. "And every one of those contacts could be a disease-transmission event."
By the time the colony reorganizes itself a few weeks later, more of its members are likely infected. Plus, since rats are notoriously prolific, producing six to 10 pups a litter several times a year, that colony will be back to its original size in no time.
What you can do to protect yourself: One of the few things individuals can do is prevent infestations in their own living spaces, Himsworth says. That means ensuring your personal environment doesn't attract rats by making sure food sources such as garbage, bird seed and compost are well managed, and sealing off entryways by repairing cracks and crumbling foundations.
If you do have an infestation, call a licensed pest-control professional who can assess your home to determine why you have an infestation and tackle your rat problem accordingly, she says.
The trouble is this tactic only covers a small amount of space in which you come in contact on a daily basis, Himsworth says.
To truly reduce the harm these pests can create, she says, cities need to have organized, systematic and scientifically based rat-control programs. These include measures such as collecting data on rat infestations, which could help identify problem areas and lead to ways of improving sanitation, as well as implementing rat-specific bylaws, such as requiring property owners to deal with infestation.
MOSQUITOES
Why they're a threat: The majority of the roughly 82 species of mosquito found in Canada are harmless to humans. Not all species bite humans and only female adults feed on blood so they can develop eggs. In fact, many mosquitoes are important pollinators since they feed on plant nectar.
But, of course, mosquitoes are not only a nuisance when they do bite us, as a variety of species can also transmit diseases, says Dr. Manisha Kulkarni, assistant professor in the School of Epidemiology and Public Health at the University of Ottawa.
"Mosquito-borne diseases are on the rise globally. And with the changing climate, different species may be arriving further north, so it's good practice to take personal precautions and use repellents and try to avoid mosquito bites as much as possible," she says.
Fewer than 10 species in Canada pose the greatest risks. These include members of the genus Culex and Aedes, as well as certain species of genus Culiseta and Anopheles, Kulkarni says.
Culex mosquitoes are the principal vectors of West Nile virus, which is arguably the most well-known mosquito-transmitted disease in the country. In Eastern Canada, these are the species Culex pipiens and Culex restuans, and in Western Canada, Culex tarsalis.
The first human case of West Nile virus in Canada was reported in Ontario in 2002.
Since then, the number of cases in the country has fluctuated from year to year, up to 2,215 cases in 2007 to a low of five cases in 2010. While 104 cases were reported last year, according to federal government records, none have yet been reported this year.
Most people infected with West Nile virus are asymptomatic, so they won't even know they have it, Kulkarni says.
Around 20 per cent of them will experience febrile illness, in other words, a mild fever and other symptoms, such as body aches, that eventually go away.
But fewer than 1 per cent of infected individuals can go on to experience severe neurological disease, such as encephalitis, or inflammation of the brain and meningitis, which is inflammation of the protective membranes of the brain and spinal cord. There's no specific treatment for West Nile virus.
Since the types of mosquitoes that carry West Nile virus tend to thrive in urban areas, that's where human cases of the virus often show up. Some of the other mosquito-borne diseases are transmitted between mosquitoes and animals in rural or wooded areas, where humans are unlikely to get involved in those transmission cycles, Kulkarni says. "Only rarely would they spill over to people," she says.
Other mosquito-borne viruses in Canada that can make people ill include eastern equine encephalitis, western equine encephalitis, California serogroup viruses, which include Jamestown Canyon and snowshoe hare viruses, St. Louis encephalitis and Cache Valley virus.
Although the mosquito-borne Zika virus has captured headlines in recent years, the Canadian government notes the mosquitoes that transmit the virus, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, are not established in Canada because of its colder climate. However, University of Notre Dame researchers reported finding Aedes aegypti mosquitoes as far north as Washington, in a study published in 2016.
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), areas where there's a risk of Zika include Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, most of South America, much of Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands.
Cases of Zika have also been reported in Florida - though the CDC no longer has recommendations to avoid travelling there - as well as one mosquito-borne case reported in Texas late last year.
Where you'll find them: Because of climate change, the areas that mosquitoes inhabit will likely expand, Kulkarni says.
But their populations fluctuate dynamically from season to season. Warmer temperatures earlier in the year, for example, increase the likelihood of more mosquitoes.
And across the Toronto area, a mild winter and wet spring have created prime conditions for mosquitoes. Jennifer Fang, an aquatic biologist for the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority, says she and her team have collected significantly more mosquitoes through their West Nile virus mosquito-monitoring program so far this year than in previous years.
A warmer winter has allowed more adult female Culex mosquitoes to survive and a rainy spring has created standing water for them to lay eggs, Fang says.
Moreover, she says, certain species of Aedes mosquitoes lay eggs, which can be viable for up to 15 years, in moist soil, so they need floodwater to hatch. Eggs that did not have enough moisture to hatch last year have the opportunity to hatch this year, Fang says. "Just so many factors compounded to [create] a really bad mosquito season this year," she says.
The chances of infection, including the amount of time it takes for a virus to develop within a mosquito and the biting rates of mosquitos, are highly dependent on seasonal temperatures, Kulkarni says.
"So many aspects of mosquito biology are driven by temperature," she says.
In a single year, there are usually a few generations of Culex mosquitoes. Culex mosquitoes diapause, or become dormant, over the winter as adults and lay eggs after the snow melts. They develop into larva and pupa stages in the spring and the first generation of adults are typically seen in June and July.
During summer and into the fall, depending on how warm it stays, this cycle repeats itself two or three times.
Thus, their populations increase over the summer as the weather gets warmer and the burden of virus within the population also builds up, Kulkarni says.
Environments in which mosquitoes thrive are specific to each species. But Culex mosquitoes favour stagnant water, which is why they're often found in urban areas, in eavestroughs and storm drains, Kulkarni says.
How to protect yourself: Mosquitoes tend to appear in greater numbers in the late afternoon and early evening, so if you can hide out indoors during that time of day, you're less likely to be bitten.
And the more you cover up with clothing, the better off you are, Kulkarni says, though she acknowledges, "It's not always realistic in the Canadian summer, when people don't want to be covering up."
So your best defence against mosquitoes if you're planning to enjoy your summer evenings outdoors, without wearing fall and winter gear? Use repellent with DEET or picaridin, both of which are recommended and proven effective, Kulkarni says. (Plus, they also protect you from ticks. See next page.)
TICKS Why they're a threat: There are 40 species of ticks in Canada, but most are associated with their preferred hosts. Groundhog ticks are usually found on groundhogs.
Rabbit ticks are most likely found on rabbits.
"They're not all attracted to humans," says Dr. Kateryn Rochon, assistant professor of entomology at the University of Manitoba.
The ones that do feed on humans tend to be "generalists," attracted to a variety of hosts and, in Canada, there are only four major species that commonly bite people, Rochon says: the blacklegged tick, also called deer ticks (Ixodes scapularis); the American dog tick, also called wood ticks; the Rocky Mountain wood tick, which is found in Saskatchewan and Western Canada; and in the Pacific, the western blacklegged tick (Ixodes pacificus).
Blacklegged ticks are getting plenty of attention these days, since they transmit the Borrelia burgdorferi bacterium that causes the much-dreaded Lyme disease. (Western blacklegged ticks can transmit Lyme disease, too, but they don't get infected much, Rochon says.)
In Manitoba, the first reported blacklegged tick was recorded in 1989, according to Rochon. They're believed to have been introduced to Canada by migrating birds. Millions of blacklegged ticks are believed to be dropped into the country every year by birds, Rochon says, but the reasons why they've become established here are multiple and complicated.
One of the best hypotheses, she says, is that reforestation efforts over the past several decades have created habitats for deer, mice and other animals that are hosts for ticks. Climate change may also mean hosts are moving into new areas. As well, she says, milder and shorter winters may allow ticks to survive once they've been dropped by migratory birds, whereas in previous decades, the climate may have been too cold for them to survive.
How they spread disease: In addition to Lyme disease-causing Borrelia burgdorferi, blacklegged ticks are also able to transmit Anaplasma phagocytophilum, a bacterium that causes granulocytic anaplasmosis, which can be fatal in rare cases; the blood parasite Babesia microti; the bacterium Borrelia miyamotoi and Powassan virus. Individuals who are infected with these pathogens can experience a range of symptoms, from none at all, to flu-like symptoms, to long-term neurological problems.
Rocky Mountain wood ticks and American dog ticks do not transmit these illnesses, but both are able to transmit Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typically characterized by a sudden fever and headache and, rarely, tularemia.
While Borrelia burgdorferi, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Babesia microti and Borrelia miyamotoi are the four pathogens you're more likely get from tick bites, Rochon says, some of these are prevalent in only 1 per cent to 5 per cent of ticks.
"It's not like all these ticks are infested and you'll be sick for sure," she says.
When a tick ingests the blood of an infected host, the pathogen passes through the gut membrane and travels through the tick's body to the salivary glands. It then crosses the barrier of the salivary glands into the tick's saliva, Rochon says.
To keep their host's blood flowing when they feed, ticks and other blood-sucking arthropods inject their hosts with saliva, which contains molecules that prevent the blood from coagulating and prevent the host from noticing them.
"It's part of why they're so good at transmitting pathogens, because their saliva modifies the local immune response. So when the bacteria goes in, it kind of has a nice little bed of modified immune response" that allows them to thrive, she says.
Ticks are able to transmit pathogens such as Anaplasma and Babesia within an hour. But when it comes to Lyme disease, the Borrelia burgdorferi bacterium in an infected tick's gut doesn't pass into its body right away. It needs blood to "wake it up," before it makes its way into the tick's body, which only happens after the tick starts feeding, Rochon says. Once in the body, the bacterium then enters the salivary glands and gets into the saliva. All of this takes time. Which is why, if you remove a tick within 24 hours of it attaching itself to you, your chances of getting Lyme disease are extremely low, she says.
When they're active: Female blacklegged ticks lay eggs in late spring. The larvae that hatch are usually pathogen-free and they typically feed on small animals such as mice, not humans. The larvae then molt into nymphs, which is generally regarded as the most important stage from a public-health standpoint, Rochon says. Nymphs tend to be most active during summer.
If they've fed on an infected animal during the larval stage, nymphs can transmit pathogens, Rochon says. They're also extremely small, about the size of a poppy seed, so they may go undetected and people who develop symptoms may not recall getting a tick bite.
It can take up to four years for blacklegged ticks to reach the adult stage.
Adults tend to be active until there's snow on the ground. In the spring, they're back "questing," or waiting to attach themselves to hosts. Rochon advises people to keep an eye out for ticks from early in the year when the snow melts until there's snow on the ground again.
How to protect yourself: Use repellent containing DEET or picaridin. If your repellent has a lower concentration than 30 per cent DEET, it will still work, but you'll have to reapply more often, Rochon says. Picaridin is a good choice for children, she adds. "It doesn't stink like DEET does." (But don't bother with citronella oil, she says. It won't keep the ticks away.)
Ticks climb up long grass and low shrubs to seek hosts and they seek shelter in lower vegetation and leaf litter. If you're heading into an area where you know there are ticks, wear long pants and tuck the legs into your socks and tuck your shirt into your waistband, Rochon says.
"It's not sexy, but health is sexy," she says, explaining these measures, along with wearing light-coloured clothing, will allow you to see and remove ticks as they crawl up your body in search of a place to attach themselves.
GIANT HOGWEED
Why it's a threat: Giant hogweed is a particularly impressive and nasty member of the carrot family, known for its enormous size and ability to cause severe skin burns.
Since giant hogweed plants produce thousands of seeds that spread easily, this prolific species is an environmental menace.
It out-competes native plants, dominating areas where it grows.
Giant hogweed originates from the Caucasus Mountains, around Eastern Turkey.
But in the 19th century, it was introduced to Western Europe as an ornamental plant, says Tardif, professor of plant agriculture at the University of Guelph. In Canada, over the past 15 to 20 years, giant hogweed has become more prevalent as an invasive species, Tardif says, though it's unclear why. Greater public awareness may, in part, be driving increased reports of the presence of this noxious plant.
Brushing up against the massive leaves won't necessarily cause you harm. But if the plant is broken in any way, beware. It's the sap that makes giant hogweed a public-health concern, Tardif says. The sap contains chemical compounds called furanocoumarins, which penetrate the skin if you come in contact with it, Tardif says.
These compounds make your skin cells sensitive to UV rays. Thus, subsequent exposure to sunlight results in a chemical burn that could require medical attention.
"It's not immediate burning," Tardif says.
Burns occur "between 24 and 48 hours if you're exposed to sun after [contact]."
Although he has never experienced this himself, Tardif says others have described it as a painful burning sensation, unlike the itching that comes from contact with poison ivy. (A warning to the squeamish: a Google search of "giant hogweed" will turn up truly ghastly images of raw and blistered limbs.)
The skin discoloration that follows can take a long time to disappear, Tardif says.
Dark brown scars can last for years. Although giant hogweed is believed to cause blindness, Tardif says he isn't aware of any documented cases of blindness because of hogweed in medical literature. It may be possible that one's tears would wash away any sap from the eyes before it causes real damage, he says. But then, of course, no one wants to try.
Where it grows: It's uncertain when giant hogweed was introduced to Canada, although Tardif says early records show it was here by the mid-20th century and he notes it was likely sold here as a garden plant.
"It's a very nice plant, very tall, very spectacular," he says.
These days, "you can find it pretty much everywhere," he says, noting that although it is widespread, "that doesn't mean it's abundant."
Giant hogweed thrives in wet areas, mostly along riverbanks, creeks and streams. It grows well in both shaded and sunny areas. Once established, a colony can creep up riverbanks and into fields, but for the most part, it is found near water.
How to spot it: With white flower-clusters, hogweed resembles other members of the carrot family, such as angelica or Queen Anne's lace. But its size sets it apart. Mature plants are generally three- to fourmetres tall (sometimes as high as five metres) and they grow leaves as long as a metre wide. Young plants, which are smaller, may be harder to identify and thus, can be more dangerous when they grow in June and July, Tardif says.
Size aside, giant hogweed also has distinct hairy, bristly stems, with red blotches and red dots at the base of these hairs and on the stem.
How to protect yourself: Identifying giant hogweed is the first step, Tardif says. If you spot a large colony on your property, it's best to call professionals for help. But if you're trying to get rid of only a few plants, be sure to cover up in trousers, long sleeves, rubber gloves and rubber boots before you start weeding, Tardif says. Be careful not to let the sap splatter; this is not a plant you want to tackle with a weed whacker.
He suggests cutting the plant at the base and letting it rot in plastic bags before discarding it. Then, get a shovel to dig up the roots, which can grow more than half a metre deep.
If you get the sap on your skin, wipe it off as quickly as you can. Tardif says his team of researchers always carries moist towelettes and baby wipes when working with giant hogweed. And, he says, make sure you cover up the area with long sleeves and trousers, and avoid sunlight for at least a few days afterward.

Load-Date: July 10, 2017


End of Document




OPINION; WHY DON'T WE CARE ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE?; Ignorance and selfishness aren't the reasons we face environmental catastrophe - it's the way our ancient brains calculate risk and reward, Dan Gardner writes. Learning to accept that may help save us
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 22, 2018 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O1
Length: 3867 words
Byline: Dan Gardner
Body


Author of Risk: The Science and Politics of Fear and a principal at Tactix, an Ottawa consultancy
This essay is about a riddle.
I'll start by revealing the answer: It's a cat that is simultaneously dead and alive.
Now here is the riddle: Why aren't we more concerned about climate change?
By "we," I mean, of course, most Canadians. There are some so concerned they despair and lose sleep over climate change.
But most of us? Polls show we accept that climate change is real and threatening. And we tell pollsters we are truly, deeply worried.
More than a decade ago, an Ipsos Reid survey found almost twothirds of Canadians said they were "desperately concerned that if we don't take drastic action right now the world may not last much longer than another couple of generations." Desperately concerned is what parents are when a child goes missing.
But those words were crafted by a pollster. And it costs people nothing to say, "Yeah, that one," when a stranger on the telephone asks how much they care about something they know they are supposed to care about. It even feels good - admit it - to display your social conscience.
So let's set aside what we say and what we tweet - #ClimateCrisis - and look at what we do.
Climate change doesn't dominate elections. It doesn't dominate headlines, airtime and social media. It doesn't dominate consumer choices.
It doesn't even dominate Google searches. For the past decade, "climate change" and "global warming" have been searched about as often as "terrorism." People search far more often for "autism," and more still for "flu." Terrorism, autism and influenza are all serious hazards, but none of them has even an outside chance of ravaging the natural world and collapsing civilization. (It should be noted in passing - for the edification of the alien archeologists investigating the ruins on Earth - that every year for the past decade, "Kardashian" has been searched far more than any of the foregoing terms.)
Of course, there are occasional spasms of attention, usually when some international conference convenes. Big ones such as Copenhagen (2009) and Paris (2015). Lesser ones such as the conference in Poland that just concluded. They're now familiar enough that there is a settled routine. Officials gather, scientists warn, commentators opine and politicians intone. Climate change gets headlines, although not the top ones, and it gets airtime, if not in the quantities garnered by a Trump tweet or a Kardashian baby. And there is the usual flurry of hashtag activism.
But so much of this feels dutiful, even desultory. And it lasts as long as snow in June.
Now, compare that to the reality we face: In the coming decades and centuries, climate change will be a major challenge in the bestcase scenario and something truly terrifying in the worst case.
What we do now will significantly determine whether the future unfolds closer to the former or the latter. In any scenario, the poorest and weakest will suffer most.
Most people know and accept all this. And those three sentences are reason enough to conclude that climate change is the greatest threat we face, save for nuclear war. But we sure don't act like it.
So why isn't our collective concern remotely proportionate to the danger?
The problem isn't ignorance.
Most people get the basic idea.
And when yet another dire report is issued by scientists, people do pay attention - for a few minutes, at least, before their thoughts return to the latest political imbroglio, taxes, work, the hockey game and the thousands of other concerns that consistently beat climate change in the battle for our attention.
It's also not selfishness. The brunt of the storm may be suffered by future generations and poor people far away, but researchers do not find that the old shrug while the young quake. In fact, one U.S. newspaper found that "millennials have similar or less engagement on global warming than other generations."
So back to the answer to the riddle - the cat is simultaneously dead and alive.
In 1935, physicist Erwin Schrodinger devised a vivid way to criticize a school of thought in quantum mechanics known as the Copenhagen interpretation. He imagined a cat.
The cat is inside a box. With the cat is a vial of poison. The poison can be released by the radioactive decay of a subatomic particle.
The Copenhagen interpretation says subatomic particles can exist in multiple states simultaneously, meaning a particle can be decayed and not decayed at the same time.
The cat Schrodinger imagined would be dead if the particle were decayed, alive if not. It follows that if the particle is both decayed and not decayed, the cat is both dead and alive.
Since this is plainly absurd, Schrodinger reasoned, the Copenhagen interpretation must be wrong. It's common sense.
But 83 years later, the Copenhagen interpretation is mostly accepted by physicists. Common sense says it's wrong. Math says it's right.
A lot of modern physics is like that. What our senses and judgment tell us must be true is revealed by math to be false, while what is true feels wrong. To use the old head and gut metaphor, head can grasp the science - barely, and with great effort - but gut is entirely flummoxed.
The cause of this divide is evolution. Our species evolved in environments where subatomic weirdness was irrelevant to surviving and reproducing, so we never developed an intuitive grasp of it; while we may understand it, we cannot feel it.
We struggle with climate change in much the same way and for much the same reason.
Like us, our Stone Age ancestors were constantly looking into the future and imagining alternative courses of action. They had to predict the weather, foresee how an ambushed deer would try to escape and plan to return to a rich berry patch at harvest time. And most important for survival, they had to decide what to worry about. Whether it was lions, food shortages or sub-zero temperatures, the future was packed with threats that had to be anticipated and managed.
But note three features of this ancient forecasting and risk analysis.
First, it didn't look decades ahead, let alone centuries. Seasons would have been important frames of reference, but generally, the outer limit of prospection would have been one cycle of seasons - a year. Our ancestors' forward-looking thoughts were overwhelmingly measured in days, hours, minutes and seconds.
Second, it didn't concern itself with problems far away. The only information available to our ancient ancestors came from personal experience, the experience of others in their little band of perhaps 40 or 50 and stories passed from one person to another.
As forward-looking as our species was, ancient risk analysis was about survival in the here and now. Or at least the nearby and soon.
Finally, it had nothing to do with statistics, probability and the other tools of modern risk analysis. These didn't exist. Its raw material was experience, and its analytical mechanisms were intuitive. Risks were not calculated.
They were felt.
To put this in the terms made famous by Nobel-winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman, our judgments about risk were seldom made by our ancestors' slow, conscious, analytical mode of thinking - the one dubbed System 2. They were the product of the fast, experiential, largely unconscious and intuitive mode - System 1.
It's System 2 that can work very hard and get a decent grasp of subatomic physics. It's System 1 that moans, "But a cat can't be dead and alive at the same time!"
As it was in the Stone Age, so it was in the Iron Age and the Middle Ages. How people thought about and managed risks didn't change throughout almost the entire history of our species. System 1 dominated, always.
Even today, much less has changed than we might imagine.
We routinely encounter risks - even eating breakfast can kill - so we routinely decide which risks are worth worrying about. Overwhelmingly, these judgments are felt, not calculated - or at least far more felt than calculated. And what dominates our forwardlooking thoughts is the here and now, or the nearby and soon. Replace the word "quarter" with "season" and the thoughts of the average MBA would sound at least a little familiar to a Stone Age hunter-gatherer.
Of course, today, we also have science, statistics and computer modelling capable of churning out sophisticated risk analyses.
Sometimes these confirm System One's intuitions. Sometimes they suggest they are a little off. Occasionally, they say our feelings are seriously wrong.
What happens when head and gut disagree?
In 1950, a landmark study linking smoking to lung cancer was published. Evidence piled up rapidly. In 1964, the surgeon-general officially confirmed the danger in the United States. And yet, despite the clarity of the evidence and the severity of the hazard, smokers kept smoking, non-smokers continued to take up the habit and overall smoking rates declined only very slowly.
Nicotine addiction doubtless helped slow smoking's fall. So did corporate marketing. But more fundamentally, it was psychology at work.
In those decades, people smoked in stores, offices, hospitals, airplanes and elevators, as well as on TV and in the movies.
When the British minister of health called a news conference in 1954 to discuss the link between smoking and lung cancer, he smoked throughout.
As psychologists have demonstrated, mere exposure to something boosts positive feeling for it.
Lots of exposure meant lots of positive feeling. That mattered because one of the most basic mechanisms used by System 1 to make quick, intuitive judgments about risk is the "affect heuristic": The more negative feeling there is about something, the riskier it is felt to be, while positive feeling drives down perceived risk.
Smoking was everywhere. That made people feel good about it.
And that made smoking feel safe.
For smokers, this effect was amplified by personal experience. One cigarette isn't dangerous. Neither is the next cigarette.
Or the next. Over and over, the smoker lights up, inhales and experiences no harm, only pleasure.
Primal wiring in the smoker's brain - the same wiring that convinces a bird it can safely take seeds from the hand of a human who repeatedly feeds it - sees this as proof that smoking is safe.
Scientists insisted that while one cigarette may not be dangerous, continued smoking raises the probability of harm imperceptibly but steadily. Over a lifetime, a smoker's likelihood of developing lung cancer becomes roughly similar to that of losing a round of Russian roulette. People heard this message and understood it, but only intellectually. It wasn't intuited. It wasn't felt.
What they felt was that smoking was safe. And that slowed the descent of smoking rates for decades.
When head and gut clash, it is not inevitable that gut has its way.
After all, the evidence tying smoking to lung cancer did bend the trend lines in the 1950s and 1960s.
But intuitive judgments are empowered by biology and evolution, so modifying a strongly felt conclusion is deeply unnatural, and rejecting it entirely can be a Herculean challenge.
This is why people build homes on floodplains and volcano
slopes. It's why earthquake-insurance sales spike immediately after a major earthquake then slowly decline, exactly the opposite of the risk.
And it's why we aren't remotely as concerned about climate change as we should be.
Scientists have informed me that when I drive my gasolinepowered car, the car emits carbon dioxide into the air, which makes the atmosphere an ever-so-slightly more efficient heat-trapping blanket. If I multiply my car's emissions by one billion cars and thousands more greenhouse-gas sources and seven billion people and 150 years of industrialization, the total is big trouble. I know this.
We all do.
But the last time I got in my car, drove and got out, there was no perceptible change. I suffered no harm. No one did. The same is true of the time before that. And the time before that. Not once in the hundreds of times I have driven has anything bad happened.
And look around at all the other drivers and all the other cars and all the trips being taken without anything bad happening to anyone.
My Stone Age brain's conclusion? It's the same conclusion it would have drawn about smoking in 1964.
That's what I see and feel in the present. But I also know bad stuff is coming in the future. Rising ocean levels. More droughts and hurricanes. Pests and diseases moving north. When I think about that, I imagine it. I see it in my mind's eye. Surely that should be enough to ring my internal alarm bell. And yet, that bell is quiet.
The problem is "psychological distance." If you imagine a street a few blocks from your house, what comes to mind is solid and vivid, with lots of detail about house styles, colours, people and so on.
But do the same for a street in a city in another province and your thoughts go to a higher level of abstraction - meaning you will see only the basic character of the street, with few particulars. A street in another country will be more abstract still.
That's thought across physical distances. But psychologists have found the same tendency to move from the concrete to the abstract with other forms of distance. One is distance across time; thoughts about a vacation next week will be detailed, while a vacation next year will be less so. There is also social distance; you will imagine people like you in real terms, while those who are different will be more abstract. And there is hypothetical distance, where what is perceived to be likely is seen in more concrete terms than the unlikely. Together, these are "psychological distance."
Psychological distance matters for judgments about risk because concrete thoughts are tangible.
They engage our senses. We can feel them, and they can move us.
But abstract thoughts have none of those qualities. They are cold and lifeless. It's a contrast captured perfectly in a saying often attributed to Joseph Stalin: "The death of one man is a tragedy. The death of one million is a statistic."
Climate change is distant in every dimension. The worst of it lies decades in the future, to be suffered in far-off lands by foreigners very different from us, and the worst scenarios are highly uncertain. It would be hard to design a threat more likely to induce highly abstract thoughts. And shrugs.
And there's another big problem with climate change: It's right there in the first word.
What is climate? It's not weather. Weather is rain, wind, snow, sunshine. We have a feel for weather. Our species has been intuiting it as long as we have existed.
But climate? It's the probability of weather.
On any given day in a particular place, a range of weather is possible. Not all outcomes are equally likely. Some are much more probable, others less so and some are extremely unlikely. Think of a bell curve, with temperature, precipitation, wind, cloud and so on arrayed across it. That's the climate of that place at that time of year.
We can understand that if we think carefully. But we have no natural, intuitive feel for it.
As the philosopher Ian Hacking showed, the modern idea of probability didn't even exist until the mid-17th century, while the first mathematical examination of probability was only published in 1713. For a species that is about 200,000 years old, 1713 is the day before yesterday. And so, when we handle probability, we are often like cavemen with smart phones - confused by even the simplest functions.
Consider the forecast, "There is a 70-per-cent chance a thing will happen." It also means there is a 30-per-cent chance it won't, so the forecast is not proved wrong if the thing does not happen. That could not be more obvious. And yet, after the 2016 U.S. presidential election, forecaster Nate Silver was almost universally said to have been wrong because he had forecast that Hillary Clinton had a 70-per-cent chance of winning.
This mistake is astonishingly common, even among smart, educated people dealing with matters of great importance. Robert Rubin, Bill Clinton's Treasury Secretary, once told me that when he informed top people in the White House and Congress that there was an 80-per-cent chance something would happen, he had to "almost pound the table" to make them see that meant there was a one in five chance it would not.
We struggle with probability, and probability defines climate.
So it should be no surprise that we struggle with climate, let alone climate change.
Or that System 1 substitutes weather, which it does understand, for climate, which it does not. It's a phenomenon researchers have called "local warming."
"Do you believe anthropogenic climate change is real? How concerned are you?" We might think that people's answers to these questions don't vary much, and whatever change there is must be the result of significant new information, such as a new scientific report or a speech by a political leader. In fact, they do vary. And one of the biggest influences is the weather.
If the weather has been unusually hot recently, belief and concern go up. Unusual cold has the opposite effect.
Climate-change activists get angry when politicians who deny or belittle climate change point to cold weather as proof there's nothing to worry about, as Donald Trump did in November and Senator James Inhofe did a few years ago when he held a snowball triumphantly aloft on the floor of the U.S. Senate. Such claims are ridiculous, of course. It's like saying a snowfall in Jerusalem proves that Jerusalem's climate isn't hotter than Stockholm's. But activists see deliberate deception. It's likelier that the Trumps and Inhofes are themselves deceived, as so many of us are, by a System 1 that uses recent weather to judge the reality and magnitude of a threat that will take decades to reach full force and centuries to play out.
That is dismaying. But it's also predictable.
Extrapolating recent experience into the future is how people have always made forecasts. If a band of ancient hunter-gatherers suffered a lion attack, they would see lion attacks in their future, putting them on guard, until enough time passed without a lion attack to allow memories to fade and the sense of threat to ebb - a matter of days, weeks or months. It worked well in that environment, on that time scale.
Today, in a very different world, we forecast this way as naturally and easily as breathing. And we do it even when a little reflection would tell us we shouldn't.
When terrorists destroyed the Twin Towers, officials and ordinary people alike were instantly certain their world would be scarred by major terrorist attacks far into the future. When the price of oil surged above US$100 a barrel, it was very widely believed it would blow past US$150 and never come back down. But the most striking illustrations are found in stock markets. Nothing convinces investors that stock prices will soar like soaring stock prices or that markets will plunge like plunging markets.
System 1 won't stop forecasting lion attacks. It can't. That's what it evolved to do. And when it rings the alarm bell, it's hard not to listen.
It's just as hard to be alarmed when System 1 doesn't ring the bell.
So why is our concern about climate change so small relative to the threat? The problem is not that we are ignorant or selfish.
The problem is how we think.
The decision-making system capable of understanding the danger is incapable of ringing our internal alarm bell. The system that can raise the alarm cannot grasp the threat because it was shaped by the world as it was millenniums ago, not the world we live in now.
Our past endangers our future.
A generation ago, officials meeting in board rooms agreed to implement sensible policies, and the acid rain and ozone-depletion crises were solved. Climate change won't be stopped the same way. It can't be. No matter what good work is done at meetings such as the recent United Nations conference in Poland, pushing the needle away from the most dangerous climate-change scenarios requires economic and social changes so fundamental that they cannot happen in a democracy without broad popular support for collective action. The only precedent for such mobilization is wartime.
But in war, we face an enemy. In this struggle, there are no tanks on the horizon. Or worse, the enemy is us. How can we rally against ourselves?
When people don't fear what they should, or fear what they shouldn't, governments and corporations typically turn to information and exhortation: If people won't stop smoking, tell them yet again that smoking causes lung cancer and urge them to quit.
If they won't buy emergency supplies to prepare for disasters, tell them disasters happen and that they should be prepared, even though they already know this and agree, they just don't do it. If they fear nuclear plants or chemicals or air travel, show them safety data, and when their feelings don't change, wave the data at them and demand they be reasonable.
This approach seldom works because it only speaks to System 2.
Worse, it treats System 2 as the Good One and System 1 as the Bad One, pitting the two against each other - a wrestling match System 1 is likely to win.
A very different approach is to see System 1 and System 2 as yin and yang, two halves of one whole. Neither is good or bad.
Each is capable of making mistakes, or correcting them, depending on circumstances, and each interacts with the other in complex ways. Our judgment is at its best when the two are harmonious.
Seen this way, the goal is to help System 1 feel what System 2 calculates.
We're doing that now with smoking. Gory photos on cigarette packages tell smokers nothing they don't already know, but they do associate cigarettes with something hideous, which boosts negative affect and System 1's feeling of risk. Similarly, smoking bans pushed cigarettes out of the public sphere, turning what was familiar and likeable into something alien and unsettling. These and other stigmatization and denormalization policies helped drive down smoking rates by turning psychological mechanisms that once encouraged smoking against it.
Climate-change researchers are exploring a wide range of interventions designed to speak to System 1. The most promising involves shrinking psychological distance by replacing "distant" abstractions with concrete, hereand-now words and images.
That means replacing an abstraction such as "rising ocean levels" with an image of Prince Edward Island's coastline when the iconic red beaches have been swallowed.
In place of "future generations," describe a person with a face, name and story. Instead of "the economy" and "global temperatures," describe her hunger and the sweltering heat.
Done well, the remote threat becomes as concrete - as detailed, vivid and visceral - as a lion crouching at the edge of the long grass, her muscles tense, her stare relentless.
There's nothing new about this, of course. But that's the point. Good storytellers have been shrinking psychological distance since the days when stories were told around campfires and System 1 was evolving to help us make sense of the world.
People cannot feel dangers measured in atmospheric concentrations of a gas so common we exhale it.
But we can feel lions. We just have to see them.

Load-Date: December 22, 2018


End of Document




OPINION; Macklem will have to navigate climate-change risk at BoC; Central bank cannot ignore crisis, and its next chief will have to look at corporate-bond purchase program
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 12, 2020 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B2
Length: 777 words
Byline: KEVIN QUINLAN
Body


Senior adviser with Mantle314, a Toronto-based consulting firm focused on climate change With the announcement of Tiff Macklem as the next governor of the Bank of Canada, the federal government chose someone with deep knowledge of the nation's economy and the risks and opportunities of climate change. He is a good choice at a time when Canada is facing duelling crises of a cratering economy and a warming planet.
Mr. Macklem will have to navigate the issue of climate change in a way no previous Bank of Canada governor has had to, both at home and abroad. Some will argue that climate change is outside of the Bank of Canada's mandate. But if the bank's role is to support the stability of Canada's financial system, it cannot ignore a crisis that poses physical risks to our country, such as increasing floods and forest fires disrupting supply chains and business operations.
Nor can the bank turn a blind eye to the transition risk of global efforts to dramatically reduce emissions, leading to declining market demand for carbon-intensive products and, in the process, stranding assets.
Mr. Macklem's work on climate change is well documented. As chair of the federal government's Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, he helped develop recommendations for Canada's financial system to support a transition to a low-carbon economy. The recommendations included RRSP incentives for green investments, enhanced corporate disclosure of climate risks, and scaled-up investments in building retrofits and clean energy.
The panel's report received a favourable response from the government, but to date, little has happened. The new governor has an opportunity to spur the government to move the recommendations forward.
One climate issue Mr. Macklem will have to address is the bank's $10-billion corporate-bond purchase program. Many of the companies urgently in need of liquidity are the ones most affected by the drop in demand for fossil fuels - and most at risk in a climate-adjusted future. The fallout from the Russian-Saudi oil price war and COVID-19 has compounded these risks. By purchasing corporate bonds of these companies, the Bank of Canada is providing a short-term boost, but potentially loading up on longer-term climate risk.
Climate change won't just be a domestic issue for the bank. Central banks such as the U.S. Federal Reserve are under growing scrutiny from politicians about how their policies contribute to climate change. Canada is a member of the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), where central banks are discussing ways to align the financial system with the Paris Agreement climate goals. Mr. Macklem will need to navigate debates such as whether central banks should change their purchasing programs so as to shift capital away from high-carbon assets, as well as different ways to conduct climate stress tests.
As the next governor, Mr. Macklem has an opportunity, if he chooses, to chart a course for the bank that supports economic recovery, while positioning Canada for success in a low-carbon economy. What could that look like?
It starts with the tone at the top.
As we saw with Mr. Macklem's former boss Mark Carney when he became governor at the Bank of England, a clear, public commitment early in the mandate that climate change is a priority will send a signal to markets and throughout the bank itself. In his new United Nations climate finance role, Mr. Carney will surely be keeping an eye on Mr. Macklem's moves. At the same time, Mr. Macklem can expect political and industry pressure from those who think high-carbon energy production is Canada's only path out of recession.
Mr. Macklem will have to push the federal government to implement the Expert Panel's recommendations, particularly those that mobilize private capital behind transitioning Canada's oil and gas sector to lower carbon operations. He could make clear he intends to follow through on the bank's 2019 commitment to run climate stress tests. He could use his platform to make the case that corporate Canada needs to dramatically improve its disclosure and reporting of climate risk.
With credible actions at home, Mr. Macklem could push the bank toward a more active role at the NGFS, urging faster adoption of Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TCFD) reporting and adding a voice to other central banks calling for a green economic recovery.
The economic impact of COVID-19 may be the immediate priority, but climate change won't go away just because we are standing six feet apart. The challenge facing Mr. Macklem is not should the Bank of Canada address climate change now, but how to do so during an economic collapse.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




No region untouched by climate change, study shows
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
March 11, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; THE NEW CLIMATE: FROM SEA TO SEA; Pg. A11
Length: 853 words
Byline: BILL CURRY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


 Climate change is already affecting every region of Canada, according to a major new federal government study that cites specific local examples of the good and bad in a warming nation. 
 A common theme throughout the report is the many ripple effects to come from increasing water scarcities. Hydro power will be harder to come by, while Canada's thirsty neighbours to the south are expected to intensify political pressure for access to northern taps. 
 "With increasing drought projected for the southwestern United States and Mexico, growing demands for export of Canadian water can be anticipated," states the 448-page report. 
 Titled From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, the report was posted without fanfare Friday on the Natural Resources Canada website. 
 Building on the conclusions of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the report's authors take a close regional look at what rising temperatures mean for Canada. 
 "On average, Canada has warmed by more than 1.3C since 1948, a rate of warming that is about twice the global average," it states, identifying the Western Arctic as posting the greatest temperature increases. 
 "All of Canada, with the possible exception of the Atlantic offshore area, is projected to warm during the next 80 years. ... Temperature increases will be greatest in the high Arctic, and greater in the central portions of the country than along the east and west coasts." 
 The report's team of advisers, writers and editors include federal and provincial public servants, academics, aboriginal groups and civil society organizations such as the Canadian Federation of Municipalities. 
 Canadians will notice the effects at the extremes: High summer temperatures that exceed 30 degrees will be more common, creating more smog-related deaths for vulnerable Canadians such as the elderly. Extreme cold in winter will be less common, bringing its own problems. The lack of deep cold spells that kill off such bugs as the mountain pine beetle could lead to new infestations, putting Canada's prairie crops at risk. 
 Among the regional findings: 
 *  There have been dramatic drops in Great Lakes water levels. 
 *  Sea level measured at Charlottetown on Prince Edward Island has risen 32 centimetres over the past century. 
 *  Retreat of glacier cover in Western Canada has been widespread since the late 1800s, and since the 1920s in the Arctic. 
 *  Snow cover in the Arctic has decreased by 20 days a year since 1950. 
 On the positive side, the report predicts the summer tourism season will be longer and more land will be available for forestry. 
 Erik Haites, an environmental consultant who co-wrote the chapter on how climate change will affect international relations, expressed hope that Canadians will broaden their understanding of global warming. 
 "I think most people hear the term of climate change and think of it in terms of average temperature changing. But precipitation [and] evaporation are a substantial part of that," he said. "I think the general public hasn't made those links to the water impacts of climate change, although that's been in the science for a number of years." 
 Though it was released on the website, official versions of the report have yet to be printed and there was no formal government press conference to announce the report. 
 Mr. Haites said he hopes that won't lessen the impact of the research. 
 "The message that it is happening now is something that we hope that the public and the policy makers will take away from this," he said.
Regional effects
 A new report from Natural Resources Canada, From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, outlines the impact
 of climate change on each region of the country. 
 NORTHERN CANADA 
 *  The Western Arctic will be the most affected region in Canada 
 *  Species habitat will shift and melting permafrost will create problems for human infrastructure such as buildings and roads
 *  Newly open Arctic waters will create business opportunities, but also threaten national security, the environment and local cultures 
 ATLANTIC CANADA 
 *  More storms and coastal erosion due to rising sea level 
 *  Sea lettuce has been spreading since 1990, bringing negative effects for shellfish 
 QUEBEC 
 *  In Northern Quebec, a gradual cooling has been replaced by a sudden warming of about 2 degrees celsius since 1993 
 *  Hydroelectricity and forestry in the north could benefit
 Ontario 
 *  Lower Great Lakes water levels could affect the shipping industry 
 *  Water shortages have occurred or are expected in sections of Durham, Waterloo and Wellington counties and along the shoreline of southern GEORGIAN BAY 
 *  Heat-related mortality could more than double in southern and central Ontario by the 2050s 
 PRAIRIES 
 *  More frequent droughts could cost farmers billions
 *  Loss of cold winters could spread pests and disease 
 BRITISH COLUMBIA
 *  Glaciers in B.C. are currently retreating at rates unprecedented in the past 8,000 years 
 *  Warming waters add to the vulnerability of Pacific salmon fisheries in freshwater and saltwater 
Bill Curry

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: March 11, 2008


End of Document




Gore preaches green gospel to Canadians; Liberals tell former U.S. vice-president that they're upset by Harper's stand on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 15, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 507 words
Byline: JANE TABER
Dateline: MONT-TREMBLANT, QUE. 
Body


 Al Gore heard yesterday from current and former Liberal MPs about the direction the Harper government is taking on the issue of climate change.
 The former U.S. vice-president, who is on a campaign to address the climate-change crisis, was in this Laurentian resort town to speak at Canada 2020, a conference to look at progressive approaches to public policy.
 Former Liberal deputy prime minister John Manley said he talked to Mr. Gore, telling him that Canadians are concerned about climate change and climate disruption. Mr. Manley said he told Mr. Gore his message on climate change would be well received here despite ". . . where the Conservative government is going." 
 Mr. Gore has become a highly sought-after speaker on issues of climate change and a greener world after releasing a movie on the subject, An Inconvenient Truth. 
 According to Canadian politicians, Mr. Gore is aware of what the Harper government is doing on the climate-change issue. 
 The Conservative government is backing away from the Kyoto accord, instead attempting to design its own "made-in-Canada" environmental policy. 
 The U.S. has not signed on to the Kyoto accord to reduce greenhouse gases.
 Mr. Gore yesterday urged Canada and the United States to become part of positive changes in the environment. 
 "I hope that both the United States and Canada will become officially part of the solution," he told reporters after attending a cocktail reception with a select few of the 160 conference participants, many of whom are Liberals, including former and current MPs and ministers. Reporters were not allowed to hear his speech. 
 Liberal Leader Bill Graham said that Mr. Gore "was very good on his view that we need a progressive agenda in the world and . . . there is a threat by various conservative regimes." 
 Liberal leadership candidate Stéphane Dion, a former environment minister, said he also talked to Mr. Gore about the environment. 
 "I spoke to him about the fact that we brought the world together in Montreal [at the UN Climate Change conference last December] and he told me some people are working to bring the world apart," Mr. Dion said. 
 "He did not mention the government and I didn't. I never, never will speak against my government when I am with international personalities," he said, noting that in opposition Stephen Harper appeared on American television to criticize the Liberal government for not going into Iraq. 
 The two-day-long seminar, Canada 2020 Progressive Policies, Practical Solutions, is giving Liberals a chance to take a look at themselves and their policies outside the highly partisan venue of official Ottawa. 
 The conference is the result of efforts by some long-time Liberals, including Tim Barber and Gene Lang, who several months ago began planning a conference to look at public policy in a progressive way. 
 As well, the group has established a Canada 2020 think tank to counter the country's right-wing think tanks, such as the Fraser Institute. Mr. Barber is planning to make this conference an annual affair. 

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: September 15, 2006


End of Document




Australia's PM shows political courage on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 16, 2011 Saturday


Copyright 2011 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT COLUMN; CARBON TAX; Pg. F9
Length: 684 words
Byline: JEFFREY SIMPSON
Body


 jsimpson@globeandmail.com 
 Last Sunday night, the Prime Minister of Australia went on national television. 
 Prime ministers in democratic countries take to the airwaves only if they have something extremely important to say. And Prime Minister Julia Gillard did. She said something inconceivable in Canada, at least under Stephen Harper's government. 
 "Most Australians now agree our climate is changing," she said. "This is caused by carbon pollution. This has harmful effects on our environment and on the economy. And the government should act." 
 And act it did. Next July 1, the Australian government will put a price of $23 a tonne on carbon for the country's 500 largest emitters. Three years later, the government will convert that tax into an emissions trading scheme, or cap-and-trade, whereby the government will mandate emission limits and let the market set the price. 
 At a press conference, Ms. Gillard explained her thinking: "The avalanche of science tells us our climate is changing. The science is in. We know that out planet is warming. We know that warming is changing our climate." 
 Climate change has been a political killer in Australia. Former Liberal (conservative) prime minister John Howard did little about it. His successor, Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd, failed to get serious measures approved. He had a deal, or so he thought, with the then Liberal leader, only to have ferocious climate change skeptics dethrone that leader. Mr. Rudd himself then was deposed in a political coup by Ms. Gillard. 
 She leads a minority Labor government, propped up by independents and Greens who began holding the balance of power in the Senate on July 4. To survive, she needed something to satisfy her own party and the Greens. 
 She settled on a carbon tax on big polluters, followed by the cap-and-trade, with the money flowing into government coffers flowing back out in the form of tax cuts, support for energy efficiency, renewable energy and assistance for industries such as coal and steel that will struggle to reduce emissions. The target will be to reduce emissions by 80 per cent of the 2000 levels by 2050. 
 Can Australia do it? Like Canada, Australia is a major user and exporter of fossil fuels. Replacing coal will be very hard. Getting this policy to stick will be very hard, since Ms. Gillard's popularity is low, and her Liberal opponents are strongly opposed to serious measures against climate change. 
 She has two years until the next election, and it will be tough sledding, especially with such little progress toward any kind of global agreement. Meanwhile, the terrible decade-long drought that struck Australia, and caused climate-change concerns to soar, ended last year. 
 In Canada, critics of a carbon tax predict economic disaster. In Australia, the Treasury department modelling shows a 10th-of-1-per-cent drop in economic output, but a continuation of strong economic growth and job creation for the next decade. Every taxpayer earning less than $80,000 will get a tax cut of at least $300 to offset what the government correctly assumes will be the result of companies passing on some of the carbon tax in higher prices. 
 Australia's proposed carbon tax is about the same as British Columbia's, but higher than the $15-a-tonne tax Alberta imposes on some companies. It's less comprehensive than B.C.'s tax, which applies to fossil fuels everywhere, not just big emitters. But it does roughly follow the B.C. commitment to recycle money from the carbon tax to lower taxes on individuals. It's not the "broad-based carbon pricing scheme" vaguely proposed by Canada's Council of Chief Executives, since it hits industrial emitters. 
 But it does show political courage. It also grasps the essence of any serious attack on carbon emissions - that a price has to be put on these emissions. 
 Any other approach is bound to fail. Regulations and subsidies, the chosen means of the Harper government, will be an expensive failure, as they have been when used elsewhere. But then this government remains indifferent to climate change, unlike our Australian cousins. 

Load-Date: July 16, 2011


End of Document




CLIMATE CHANGE; Renewables aren't enough
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 25, 2014 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A15
Length: 599 words
Byline: MARGARET WENTE
Body


mwente@globeandmail.com
All over Ontario, giant wind turbines are sprouting up across the rural landscape and ruining people's lives. Ordinary people are trying to fight them off in court, but they don't have a chance. The multinational wind industry has a lot more money than they do. The law is on Big Wind's side. So are Premier Kathleen Wynne's Liberals, who have pledged to triple the number of wind and solar generators and stick taxpayers with the bill.
But the fundamental problem with Big Wind is much bigger than cost and unreliability. It's that today's renewable energy technologies won't save us from climate change - and we're wasting our time by trying.
That's the conclusion Google has reached. It's has invested many years and resources in tackling the world's climate and energy problems. Its biggest initiative was called RE<C (Renewable Energy Cheaper Than Coal), a massive effort to find renewable energy sources that could compete in cost with coal.
Last week, Ross Koningstein and David Fork, two of the engineers at the heart of the project, published an article describing what they learned, and why Google threw in the towel. "We had shared the attitude of many stalwart environmentalists," they wrote. "We felt that with steady improvements to today's renewable energy technologies, our society could stave off catastrophic climate change. We now know that to be a false hope."
The trouble is, the problem is just too big. Even the best-case scenarios would not achieve anything like the reductions needed to stabilize carbon emissions at a level that many scientists think is necessary to stave off climate change. Nor would they affect the high level of atmospheric carbon dioxide that already exists. "If all power plants and industrial facilities switch over to zero-carbon energy sources right now, we'll still be left with a ruinous amount of CO2 in the atmosphere," they write.
So, are we doomed? They don't think so. They're engineers, and engineers are optimistic and ambitious by nature. What we need, they argue, are new technologies that are truly disruptive.
We don't know what they are yet.
But our aim should be to deploy significant resources to attain energy innovation at Google speed. "Fortunately, new discoveries are changing the way we think about physics, nanotechnology and biology all the time.
While humanity is currently on a trajectory to severe climate change, this disaster can be averted if researchers aim for goals that seem nearly impossible."
They're right. Whatever you believe about the potential influence of increased emissions on the planet, the math doesn't lie.
Even drastic changes in emissions and human behaviour won't change the math enough to change the climate calculations any time soon.
This point has been made before, most notably by the University of Manitoba's Vaclav Smil, who is Bill Gates's favourite polymath. But it's widely ignored in climate debates. The truth is that unless we develop revolutionary new energy technologies, all the climate pacts and pipeline protests in the world are just so much posturing. And the substantial premium we pay for wind power is just money in the pockets of rich wind developers.
If you believe climate change is a serious threat, there are only two ways out. One is what you could call the Naomi Klein way - abandon materialism, repudiate capitalism and hope that a dawning global consciousness (or a global carbon dictatorship) will lead us to the light. Alternatively, we could bet on scientists, engineers and human ingenuity.
Which way is more likely to succeed? You be the judge.

Load-Date: November 25, 2014


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Government says climate change will make weather more extreme
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 25, 2014 Wednesday, Atlantic Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 442 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


The federal government is warning that Canada faces greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather as a result of climate change, as well as increased risks to human health from pollution and the spread of disease-carrying insects.
In a report posted on the department's website, researchers from Natural Resources Canada said it is clear the country's climate is rapidly changing and will continue to do so for the coming decades, even if there are aggressive international efforts to limit emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that are responsible for the changes.
"Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is necessary to lessen the magnitude and rate of climate change, but additional impacts are unavoidable, even with aggressive global mitigation efforts, due to inertia in the climate system," the report said. "Therefore, we also need to adapt - make adjustments in our activities and decisions in order to reduce risks, moderate harm or take advantage of new opportunities."
The researchers said Canada is in the early stages of preparation for climate-related changes to the environment, and what measures have been taken have yet to be properly evaluated, while "agreed-upon methods to track and measure actions taken to reduce climate change risk and vulnerability do not yet exist."
Chris McCluskey, a spokesman for Natural Resources Minister Greg Rickford, said the government takes the risks seriously and has increased funding for adaptation, with a five-year program announced in 2011.
"Through our support for energy efficiency, climate change adaptation and clean technologies we are helping increase the resilience of Canada's communities and enhancing the competitiveness of our industries," he said in an e-mailed statement.
The NRCan study notes the average temperatures in Canada rose by 1.5 C between 1950 and 2010, adding that "further changes in climate are inevitable."
"On average, warmer temperatures and more rainfall are expected for the country as a whole, with increases in extreme heat and heavy rainfall events, and declines in snow and ice cover."
The government researchers highlighted a range of impacts that can be expected, including increased flooding and wild fires; the spread of insect-borne diseases such as Lyme disease and West Nile virus; increased stress on endangered species and reduction of bird populations, and industrial challenges such as lower levels on the Great Lakes system that will impair shipping. They also predict a longer growing season, which could increase food production, especially in northern regions, but will also bring more pests and extreme weather that could reduce crop yields.

Load-Date: June 26, 2014


End of Document




The future of Canada's carbon tax; In his new book, Canadian energy economist Mark Jaccard makes the case for a more expansive view of carbon policy - and dispels myths clouding the debate on fighting climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 25, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FILM; Pg. R8
Length: 1686 words
Byline: PATRICK RETHOUR, Staff
Body


If only grubby politics could get out of the way of pristine economics, the argument over the future of Canada's carbon tax could be neatly and quickly wrapped up.
The economic merits of the carbon tax could not be clearer: Greenhouse gas emissions generated by burning fossil fuels are taxed, increasing their cost over time and discouraging their use.
Not only does it deliver reductions in greenhouse gas emissions for the lowest cost, it gives consumers and businesses maximum flexibility in choosing how to do so.
And yet, around four in 10 Canadians are opposed to the federal carbon tax, unswayed by the logic of economic theory and impervious to lecturing from academics, the government and their progressive neighbours.
The federal Liberals won reelection in October after implementing a carbon tax with offsetting rebates for consumers, but it would be premature to think that the 2019 vote settled the matter, particularly since the size of the levy may need to increase tenfold for Canada to meet its climate change commitments.
The political dangers of carbon taxes are obvious enough.
Australia is the clearest example of a carbon-tax backlash, where a Labor government introduced a carbon tax in 2011, handing the Liberal opposition an electoral cudgel. The government was defeated, the tax was repealed and greenhouse gas emissions skyrocketed.
With such perils in mind, Canadian energy economist Mark Jaccard makes the case for a more expansive view of carbon policy in his new book, The Citizen's Guide to Climate Success: Overcoming Myths that Hinder Progress. One of the biggest myths, he says, is that carbon taxes are needed to fight climate change.
"The carbon tax is, from an economic efficiency perspective, the perfect policy, which is why lots of people, especially economists, keep saying we must price carbon emissions. But this statement is factually incorrect; even 100% decarbonization can be achieved by regulations alone," writes Jaccard, a professor at Simon Fraser University's School of Resource and Environmental Management.
Instead, he argues for an approach that takes into account not just theoretical purity, but the real-world prospects of success: of being implemented, and then staying in place long enough to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to levels that won't drive up global temperatures.
Flexible government regulations that set goals for emissions reductions, for instance, for lowcarbon fuel standards are the better path, he argues. Yes, such rules are more cumbersome and more costly than a carbon tax.
But they are less visible and hence less likely to generate widespread opposition.
Failure to voice support for the carbon tax is climate change heresy, but Jaccard is an apostate with impeccable credentials. He has spent decades writing on and researching climate policy, and helped to design British Columbia's carbon tax, the forerunner and template for the federal levy.
His pragmatic streak is hardwon: Jaccard recounts how he spent many frustrating hours trying to defend B.C's carbon tax from an avalanche of misinformation and outright lies after its launch in 2008, most notably the reality that most citizens received tax cuts that more than offset their carbon-tax bill.
In his view, the carbon tax very nearly led to the defeat of the B.C. Liberal government in the election the following year. The opposition NDP, with an axe-thetax platform, erased the Liberals' double-digit advantage in the polls. Worries about the vulnerability of the B.C. economy ultimately trumped all else, and allowed the Liberals to eke out a win. But Jaccard sees that experience, along with the defeat of the federal Liberals and their carbontax platform in 2008, as proof that Canada is not immune from the populist fervour that makes carbon taxes a political loser.
The federal Liberal government surely had the B.C. experience in mind when it designed its own carbon tax, including rebates that mean four-fifths of Canadian households subject to the federal levy are net beneficiaries. That is a step beyond B.C.'s design, which simply reduced corporate and individual income tax rates, a lower-profile move that made it easier for carbon-tax opponents to spread misinformation. In his 2018 book, Can We Price Carbon?, University of Michigan professor Barry Rabe makes the point that highly visible rebates can bolster public backing for carbon taxes. If the prospect of avoiding a climate catastrophe is not enough to gain your support, the prospect of losing a cheque might do the trick.
The federal Liberals, so far, have avoided the political pitfalls of carbon taxes. The party won reelection in October, although reduced to a minority and all but shut out of the carbon-tax-loathing Prairies. And the government has been studiously vague on whether the carbon tax will continue to rise after 2022. Opinion polls consistently show two things: A majority of Canadians support the carbon tax; and that support drops precipitously as the tax rises.
If Canada is to meet its commitment to reduce emissions by 2030 under the Paris Agreement, either the carbon tax will have to rise to politically toxic levels, or something else will need to take up the resulting slack. Such a step would not be a wholesale reversal of Liberal climate policy, but rather a change in emphasis.
The carbon tax is just one tool Ottawa is using to reduce emissions; among other steps, the government is also using regulations to reduce carbon pollution from industry, developing cleanfuel standards and rolling out subsidy programs.
In charting the path to 2030 and beyond, Jaccard argues, it is crucial to dispel the myths clouding the debate over fighting climate change. The myth of the indispensable carbon tax is but one.
Important for the Canadian context, especially, is his dismantling of the various excuses made for the continued expansion of the fossil fuel industry, including the argument that our domestic industry is a more ethical source of petroleum. Polemicist Ezra Levant advanced the most prominent version of this argument in his 2010 missive, Ethical Oil: The Case for Canada's Oil Sands. In short, Levant argued that the heavy carbon footprint of Alberta's bitumen projects should be disregarded because of this country's better standards for human rights and other non-environmental benchmarks.
Although he does not cite Levant directly, Jaccard disposes of the ethical-oil argument, and other equally shallow defences of the fossil fuel industry, by focusing on the central question of the incompatibility of stable, safe global temperatures with increased production of oil, natural gas and coal. "How ethical is it to harm current and future generations with climate change simply to enrich yourself?" he asks.
Crucially, though, Jaccard does not simply inveigh against apologists for the fossil fuel economy.
He then turns to progressives who see the fight against climate change as just part of a wider political agenda.
Canadian author Naomi Klein laid out that vision best in her 2014 book, This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs the Climate. In it, she argues that the neoliberal economic policies of globalization, deregulation and privatization are inextricably bound to the climate crisis. Not only have such policies given free rein to the free market to send emissions soaring, they also suffocate attempts to combat climate change. In Klein's view, "... the things we must do to avoid catastrophic warming are no longer just in conflict with the particular strain of capitalism that triumphed in the 1980s. They are now in conflict with the fundamental imperative at the heart of our economic model: grow or die."
So, that means rolling back globalization in favour of locally produced goods. Higher taxes (including carbon taxes) are needed to reverse decades of tax cuts favouring the rich and corporations. Indigenous land claims must be honoured, the social safety net expanded and decisions on power generation and resource development ceded to local communities, to name but a few of the changes for which she advocates.
Only the struggle for such radical change can spark the mass social movements that can push governments to reduce emissions. Otherwise, the fight against global warming will crash against the imperatives of a freemarket ideology that cannot contemplate trade restrictions, tighter regulations and higher taxes.
Klein understands that she is not just taking on climate change deniers but many who, at least notionally, support action on climate change but not a hard-left agenda of economic transformation. She criticizes the "fetish of centrism" that, perhaps even more than global capitalism, she sees as a barrier to avoiding a climate crisis.
Jaccard has no time for such side-crusades. The real barriers to avoiding catastrophic climate change have little to do with the deficiencies of globalization and much more do with the human inclination to react slowly to intangible and distant threats, especially when it involves personal sacrifice.
Interestingly, Klein and Jaccard agree on one key point: Individual action is not enough to deal with climate change; collective action is needed to force governments into sustained and meaningful action.
For Jaccard, "profound revolution" is not the aim, although he expresses sympathy for the questions of equity that Klein raises.
Instead, he sees a much more focused and prosaic agenda on deep cuts to carbon emissions from the electricity and transportation sectors, with advanced economies leading the way.
Trade tariffs imposed on imports from high-carbon countries will do more than sprawling, but toothless, international accords.
What Klein sees as a fetish of centrism, Jaccard views as the virtue of simplicity. Time is short, and the task of constraining emissions is already tough enough. Ultimately, Jaccard's approach to climate change, including his critique of carbon taxes, is an argument for finding a way to come together, rather than embracing policies that are intellectually pure but unnecessarily divisive.
After all what's more important: Winning an argument, or saving the planet?

Load-Date: June 17, 2020


End of Document




Climate change affecting flora; Government asks gardeners for data
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 20, 2002 Friday, National Edition


Copyright 2002 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE; Pg. A7
Length: 658 words
Byline: CHRIS MORRIS, Canadian Press
Dateline: FREDERICTON 
Body


  Federal scientists are asking Canadian gardeners to help them map the course of climate change. 
 Climate experts with Natural Resources Canada are redrawing and refocusing the familiar chart that defines hardiness zones across the country - the bible for Canadian growers. 
 From the ravages of drought on the Prairies, to the spread of warm-rooted plants where they would not have grown a decade ago, climate change is slowly having an effect on Canada's flora. 
 "I think it will be a while before you get peach trees in Tuktoyaktuk," said Dan McKenney, who is spearheading efforts in the Canadian Forest Service to devise a new plant-hardiness map. 
 "But there do seem to be anomalies. It goes both ways. There are species that have survived for a long time in particular locations but now they won't because of decreased snowfall, which protects plants in the winter." 
 Mr. McKenney is asking gardeners to take part in an Internet survey of which plants grow where. 
 "What we'd like to get is more plant-survival data. We want to use the Internet as a tool to bring experts and the public together." 
 Mr. McKenney said the federal government wants to produce a map more precise than the current hardiness chart, which lumps regions into generalized climate zones, using numbers from zero to eight as a measure of cold to warm. 
 The old map was updated last year, but it was modelled on data from 1960 to 1990 and is already out of date for some areas. 
 "We want people to tell us what grows in their location," Mr. McKenney said. "We'll take all that location information and with our climate models we can generate a climatic profile for each plant. . . . We'll have the potential range for individual plants." 
 People can click on the Natural Resources Canada site and follow directions to the plant-hardiness page to take part in the survey. 
 The prospect of longer growing seasons and lush, tropical foliage is the silver lining in the cloud of climate change for some growers. 
 Dave Phillips, a senior Environment Canada climatologist who lives in Aurora, Ont., just north of Toronto, said gardeners in his family are already eyeing more exotic southern species. 
 "In 50 years they say we'll have the climate of Kentucky," he said. 
 "Changes are both good and bad. There will be some advantages. When you live in the second-coldest country in the world, there may very well be some advantages to global warming. But in the long haul, looking at all sectors, there are more disadvantages." 
 For Lynn Brooks, president of a large gardening club near Halifax, global warming is having some unpleasant side effects. 
 Although she is noticing more difficult-to-grow plants, including such fussy flora as the blue-wave hydrangea, which is now quite common in southern Nova Scotia, she's also seeing more pests. 
 "I'm convinced pests are surviving better with climate change," said Ms. Brooks, who spent the summer stomping earwigs and various leaf-eating beetles. 
 "We need cold winters to kill them off." 
 She said growers are beginning to realize they may have to adjust their gardens to accommodate plants that survive well with less water - an acknowledgment that drought is now more common in many parts of Canada. 
 As well, less snow in winter is bad news, along with the problem of rain in January, which usually freezes and damages roots. 
 "If we see an increase of freezing and thawing and less snow, then climate change won't help gardeners," she said. 
 In the meantime, gardeners in areas that have not felt extreme weather are pushing the limits on plant varieties. 
 Magnolias, a tree symbolic of America's deep south, now blossom in downtown Fredericton. 
 George Scott, who runs a nursery near Fredericton, said people are experimenting with new varieties of more exotic plants, paying less attention to the hardiness-zone recommendations and focusing more on growing techniques. 
 "We're selling more of those types of items," he said.

Load-Date: September 23, 2006


End of Document




Securities regulators need a bolder tactic to climate-change disclosure
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 13, 2018 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B4
Length: 940 words
Byline: JANIS SARRA
Body


Presidential Distinguished Professor at the University of British Columbia and professor of law at Peter A.
Allard School of Law ast week, the Canadian SecuL rities Administrators (CSA) published its long overdue study of climate change. The Report on Climate change-related Disclosure Project was more than one year in the making. After extensive consultations with issuers and investors, securities regulators finally acknowledged the importance of climate-change financial risk, but failed to act meaningfully, announcing yet more study.
The report left Canada once again lagging international developments, all the more noticeable with the governors of central banks globally announcing two days ago the pressing need for regulatory oversight to address climate-related risks to the financial system.
The report notes that substantially all users consulted are dissatisfied with the current state of disclosure. The CSA announced that it intends to consider new disclosure requirements regarding non-venture issuers' corporate governance practices in relation to climate-change risk, but made no commitment that it will require companies to disclose their governance and oversight of climate-change-related risks.
While it was no surprise that most issuers did not want mandatory disclosure, their costs of complying would be minimal compared with the economic and related effects of having Canadian companies fail to manage emissions reductions and take other climaterelated measures.
The CSA report lumps climate change in with the need to consider cybersecurity and free trade, meaning that nothing much will happen anytime soon.
Securities regulators are caught up in the "materiality" issue under Canadian securities disclosure legislation. Materiality is currently a determining factor as to whether information must be disclosed to investors. Yet insights from reports internationally and from investors surveyed by the CSA make clear that the current materiality standard does not work for climate-related financial risks, given both the timelines and the existence of risk across the entire economy.
Disclosure relating to corporate governance is not subject to a materiality standard in Canada; climate-change should be treated similarly.
British-listed companies are now required to disclose their greenhouse gas emissions and account publicly for their contributions to climate change on an annual basis and such disclosure is being implemented in other jurisdictions.
The CSA reports that it will continue to monitor the quality of issuers' climate-change-related disclosures. Yet, their survey results reveal that improvements are needed now. It also announced it will develop new guidance to educate issuers about the disclosure of climate change-related risks, opportunities and financial impacts - education is good, but not enough. The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure, in which Canadians participated, has already proposed detailed tools and guidance that are being adopted globally.
CPA Canada, the organization of chartered accountants, is already working to educate boards on how to account for and disclose climate risk. Why would securities regulators seek to reinvent what is already being done? The Office of the Auditor-General of Canada last month reported that, on the basis of current government policies and actions, Canada is not expected to meet its 2020 target for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and that substantially more effort is needed.
The CSA report was the opportunity to require Canadian issuers and other market participants to step up and do their share of ensuring we meet our targets.
What is good in the report? The disclosure review offers some new data. More than half of issuers examined provide specific climate change-related disclosure in their MD&A and/or Annual Information Form, but the other half use boilerplate disclosure or no disclosure at all. More companies undertake some disclosure in their voluntary reports, but most disclose it as a regulatory risk, rather than looking to their own emissions and other activities contributing to climate change.
Almost no companies disclose their governance and risk management practices respecting climate change. While 43 per cent of issuers specifically mentioned physical climate-change-related risks in their regulatory filings, the majority did not quantify the potential financial impact of those risks. These results alone reveal the urgent need for regulatory reform.
Many investors suggested to the CSA that new regulatory disclosure requirements are necessary to create any meaningful improvements. Many support the TCFD Recommendations, which recommend disclosure of: the board of directors' oversight of climate-change-related risks and opportunities; management's role in assessing and managing climate change-related risks and opportunities; the process used to identify and assess climate change-related risks; and how such processes are integrated into the issuer's overall risk management process.
Canadian governments could adopt legislation similar that enacted in France to require corporations, financial institutions and institutional investors, including mutual funds and pension funds, to disclose annually the financial risks related to the effects of climate change and the company's measures to reduce them, including how they are implementing a low-carbon strategy in every component of their activities and how their corporate and investment decision-making is contributing to the energy and ecological transition to limit global warming.
It is time to align the public rhetoric with meaningful action.

Load-Date: April 14, 2018


End of Document




Folio: Climate change; HOW BAD IS IT?; As the United Nations attempts to harness new political ambition to confront climate change, new numbers show global greenhouse-gas emissions jumped a record 2.3 per cent in 2013. While there's near-unanimous agreement among climate scientists that the main cause of this alarming warming trend is the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation, the world's political and business leaders disagree on how best to control it.
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 24, 2014 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 789 words
Byline: Sol Chrom
Body


HABITAT SHIFTS
The long-term warming trend has a domino effect on landscapes and undermines conservation efforts by prompting shifts in vegetation as plant communities seek cooler areas. Thawing permafrost allows shrubs and trees to take root in the tundra; forests establish themselves in areas that used to be grasslands. As plant communities move, so do the animals that depend on them. The potential for disrupted ecosystems and migration routes grows, as does the incidence of contact and conflict with humans.
RISING TEMPERATURES
This summer, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that global average temperature set a new record in June at 61.2 F (16.2 C), 1.3 degrees higher than the 20th-century average. A new report in the Nature Geoscience journal says that containing increases in global average temperature may not even be possible unless the extraction of fossil fuels is drastically curtailed, leaving more than half the world's known reserves in the ground.
SPECIES EXTINCTION
Destruction of habitat is threatening hundreds of species. While attention has been focused on polar bears in the Arctic, melting ice sheets in the Antarctic are also affecting the emperor penguin population. The World Wildlife Fund has also identified sea turtles, whales, pandas, orangutans, elephants and frogs among species affected by habitat loss and closer proximity to humans. The David Suzuki Foundation has warned that Canada alone could lose 20 per cent of its species in vulnerable ecosystems.
ECONOMIC DISRUPTION
The forest industry, a mainstay of British Columbia's economy, has been hit hard by the mountain pinebeetle infestation. The insects, which have been thriving in unusually mild winters, have affected more than 180,000 square kilometres of Crown forest, an area more than five times the size of Vancouver Island. In July of this year, an association of forest professionals warned that climate change is having fundamental impacts on B.C. communities and ecosystems.
Top 10 warmest years since 1880 (Global combined land and ocean annuallyaveraged temperature) 1998-2013 10 years 1880-1998 0 years
Annual extinction death rate per one million species Current 100-1,000 Pre-human history 0.1
EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS
The influence of long-term warming trends is also evident in the frequency and intensity of severe weather events. The loss of Arctic sea ice has been linked to a weakened jet stream, which means weather patterns tend to linger in place for longer periods. This, in turn, can increase the duration, intensity and impact of drought, rainstorms, and heat and dry spells. The buildup of thermal energy in the warming atmosphere also creates the potential for more violent storms.
RISING SEAS
Kiribati President Anote Tong has compared his nation to the polar bears of the Pacific. Kiribati, a collection of tropical islands south of Hawaii in the central Pacific, rises no more than two metres above sea level on average, making it extremely vulnerable not only to rising ocean levels, but also erosion from rainstorms. Mr. Tong said last summer that it is already too late to save his country, even if the world agrees on drastic reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions.
WATER SCARCITY
The year 2014 is shaping up to be the driest in California history. The prolonged drought is prompting water rationing, restrictions on the use of lawn sprinklers and bans on filling swimming pools. The state's fruit and vegetable growers are also feeling the parch. Global observers are warning that competition for increasingly scarce water resources, both within and between countries, could escalate into open conflict and even war.
WHO'S BEARING THE BRUNT
While the impacts of climate change are visible everywhere, some regions will be hit harder than others. Hurricanes and typhoons will obviously hit coastal areas particularly hard; the impacts will be multiplied in developing countries where infrastructure is more vulnerable and emergency-response procedures less well-resourced. It is not just maritime countries, however; the continuing conflict in Darfur has been linked to environmental degradation as groups fight over disappearing pasture, declining crop yields and increasingly strained ecosystems.
Annual rate of sea level rise 1990-2013 3 mm 1900-2000 1.7 mm
Numbers of glaciers in Montana's Glacier National Park 1910 150 2014 25
With reports from Kim Mackrael, Elizabeth Renzetti, Mark Hume, Ivan Semeniuk and wire services. Graphic: Murat Yukselir/The Globe and Mail. Sources: World Wildlife Fund, David Suzuki Foundation, The Guardian, Nature Geoscience, The Nature Conservancy, Global Carbon Atlas, NOAA, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, U.S. National Parks Service, Science

Load-Date: September 26, 2014


End of Document




THEMATIC INVESTING; 'One of the defining issues of our time'; Three Canadian firms among 220 companies identified by Merrill Lynch as likely to benefit from finding solutions to climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 5, 2015 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GLOBE INVESTOR; Pg. B12
Length: 1144 words
Byline: DAVID MILSTEAD, Special to The Globe and Mail
Body


'Climate change: it's real, it's now and it's scary."
The statement isn't another reminder from environmental activists, frustrated at inaction by the developed world. Instead, it appears on the first page of an equity research report from Merrill Lynch - a report titled "A Call to Action - Climate Change Solutions Primer."
The assertion, and the idea that a call to action is required, may be glaringly obvious to many. But those who have been hardened by the political discourse in Canada and the United States, where climate change is deprioritized, or even denied, might be taken aback by the clarity of the Merrill Lynch message. (One U.S. financial journalist felt he needed to say "I want to stress that this is Merrill's opinion," as he shared the excerpt with his Facebook friends, including me.)
The Merrill Lynch report, part of a series on "thematic investing," certainly isn't the first piece of equity research to identify stock opportunities related to climate change. (AllianceBernstein LP identified the opportunities in the fight against climate change as an investing theme in 2009, for example.)
But the 332-page Merrill report, broad in scope, deep in detail, and freshly prepared - it was released Nov. 27 and made its way to clients this week - provides the best current road map to investing in companies that will benefit as the world, presumably, comes to grips with climate change as "one of the defining issues of our time," as the Merrill Lynch analysts say.
"Climate change and the carbon-intensive economy are already causing unprecedented damage to financial stability via physical, liability and transition risks," the U.K.-based analysts say. "Without action, the global mean cost of climate change could rise to 1 to 5 per cent of GDP [per] year - with emerging markets and the poor to be hit hardest."
The forecast from the Merrill Lynch analysts is for at least $13.5-trillion (U.S.) in global lowcarbon energy investments through 2030.
There are, in their estimation, nine main "entry points" for investors to benefit from it, from the expected sectors like energy efficiency, wind and solar, to less obvious or lesser-known spaces like nuclear and "yieldcos," the dividend-paying offshoots of many of these companies.
In all, the Merrill Lynch analysts found 220 companies among the ones their firm regularly covers that have some exposure to climate change solutions.
Their exposure ranges from "low" - the solutions being a non-material factor in the company's business model - to "high," where climate change solutions are core to the business model, perhaps even 100 per cent of sales.
But simply appearing on the list isn't a recommendation - after all, while many have "buy" ratings from the firm, Merrill Lynch is neutral on others, and has "sell" ratings on a few, for a host of factors including company fundamentals and valuation.
We'll reveal the winners - highexposure climate change companies, trading on U.S. or Canadian exchanges, that are also Merrill buys - in a moment. But first, just three Canadian companies made the Merrill list - and the names might surprise you.
Magna International, on which Merrill has a "buy," has medium exposure to climate change solutions, Merrill figures, because of an evolution in auto parts toward improving fuel economy and carbon dioxide emission reductions.
(Magna sponsored a study from the Council of Canadian Academies released in October on technology and policy options for a low-emission energy system in Canada.)
Bombardier Inc., on which Merrill has a "sell," and Canadian National Railway Co., which has a "buy" rating, have high exposure to climate change because the firm believes mass transit options are "seen as solution providers," transporting people and goods with lower emissions and less congestion.
CN is one of three railway companies on the list with high exposure and "buys," with Union Pacific Corp. and CSX Corp. the other two. New aircraft engines that consume less fuel - the centrepiece of Bombardier's recent efforts - are another trend.
Merrill's inclusion of alternative-energy companies as having high exposure to climate-change solutions is no surprise - there are four U.S.-based solar companies with "buy" ratings on the list.
Less known by investors, perhaps, are "yieldcos," an emerging structure that carves out cashgenerating alternative-energy assets from a parent company and rewards owners of the yieldcos with a dividend. The assets are typically power or other infrastructure assets that have long-term, contracted customers and can forecast cash flow over 15 to 20 years - and pay out 80 per cent to 90 per cent of cash flow, after debt service, as dividends.
Merrill has "buys" on NextEra Energy Partners LP, NRG Yield Inc., Pattern Energy Group Inc. and TerraForm Power Inc.
It has, however, been a tough year for the yieldcos: Even including dividends, total returns range from negative 25 per cent to negative 70 per cent for the four. The Merrill analysts say that volatility in the names, which started in June about two years after the yieldco model debuted on stock markets, has been driven by low oil prices, "indigestion" from their acquisitions of additional power assets, and the "over-issuance" of new shares in June and July.
This, they argue, creates "opportunity," and they urge investors to "own the tail with the strongest dog" - the highestquality parent companies that created the yieldcos in the first place. Merrill's equity-ratings model also assesses dividend strength - and in all four cases, the firm believes the yieldcos can maintain or increase dividends.
Merrill's inclusion of energy efficiency extends to the information technology industry, and allows for a set of names that also may not be the first thought in investors' minds when the topic is climate change.
Merrill has a half-dozen semiconductor, storage and tech consulting companies with high climate-change solutions exposure on its "buy" list, including Netherlands-based ASML Holding NV and NXP Semiconductors NV and Britain's ARM Holdings PLC. "Semiconductors are a key enabler of realizing energy efficiency in the automobiles, buildings, IT, capital goods, and transport sectors - as well as aiding the business case for renewables," Merrill says.
A business case that has become a lucrative imperative, they argue. CN(CNR) Close $76.14, down 60¢ Bombardier Inc. (BBD.B) Close $1.23, up 1¢ Magna International (MG) Close $59.97, up 76¢
CLIMATE-CHANGE BATTLE: TAKING STOCK
Merrill Lynch's exhaustive report on climate change, which it calls "real," "now" and "scary," identifies 220 stocks the firm covers that will benefit from some degree from solutions to the environmental problem. But only slightly more than two dozen trade on North American exchanges, have "high" exposure to solutions and have a "buy" rating from the firm; they are listed below.

Load-Date: December 5, 2015


End of Document




In the land of surfers arrives a cold Inuit message: Climate change is real
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 5, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; GLOBAL WARMING; Pg. A9
Length: 697 words
Byline: GEOFFREY YORK
Dateline: DURBAN, SOUTH AFRICA 
Body


 It took 30 hours of flying, but Inuit hunter Jordan Konek has arrived in the land of surfers and palm trees with a message for the world's politicians: Climate change is real, and it could devastate Canada's Arctic people. 
 At his home in Arviat on the western shores of Hudson Bay, the snow is arriving later and melting sooner. Hunters are falling through the ice or becoming trapped in slush. Polar bears are so desperate for food that they are raiding the town's garbage dumps. 
 "The Inuit see this and the world should know this," Mr. Konek says. "It's happening right before our eyes. If we're going to be ignored, it's like putting a shotgun in our mouth and pulling the trigger." 
 Mr. Konek, 23, and his cousin, 21-year-old Curtis Konek, are hoping their message will get through to the negotiators from 190 countries who are struggling to reach agreement on how to combat global warming. But the Durban climate conference has failed to make much progress in its first week, and analysts are warning of a potential breakdown in its final week. 
 Unlike previous climate summits, few prominent leaders will attend the final days of negotiations, knowing there will be little glory to share. Only 12 heads of state, mostly from Africa and small Pacific islands, are scheduled to arrive in Durban this week. Most of the politicians here will be lower-ranking ministers, including Canadian Environment Minister Peter Kent, who was due to arrive late Sunday night. 
 Mr. Kent will face an uphill battle as he tries to soften the negative image that Canada has quickly developed at Durban. Canada has been singled out for sharp criticism by foreign leaders and environmentalists, especially after reports that the Harper government is planning to announce Canada's withdrawal from the Kyoto Protocol and is lobbying other governments to ditch Kyoto as well.
 Thousands of people marched in the streets of Durban on the weekend to demand a legally binding agreement to fight global warming. But this seems an unlikely prospect. 
 "The negotiations aren't going very well," said Radoslav Dimitrov, a professor at the University of Western Ontario who is a member of the European Union delegation at the Durban talks. 
 "We shouldn't expect a major outcome from Durban. Some countries have practically thrown their hands up in the air and stopped negotiating. There are many countries that are obstructing the process now." 
 While the negotiations founder, scientists are reporting more bad news. Carbon emissions from fossil fuels and the cement industry have soared to a record high, rising by 5.9 per cent last year. The rise is the highest ever recorded in a single year, and the biggest increase came from rapidly industrializing countries in the developing world. 
 "The latest emissions figures should send shivers down the spines of negotiators in Durban," said Tim Gore, policy adviser for Oxfam. "It is clear that the emissions-reduction pledges set by countries to date are nowhere near adequate to avoid devastating impacts for millions of poor people." 
 Another report on Sunday warned that the world's wildlife is suffering heavy damage from global warming. The report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization documented how the changing climate is causing death and disease in a vast range of animal species - including lions in the Serengeti, elephants in West Africa, tigers in India and caribou in northern Canada. Up to 30 per cent of plant and animal species are at higher risk of extinction because of global warming, it said. 
 "The world is undergoing an extinction crisis - the most rapid loss of biodiversity in the planet's history - and this loss is likely to accelerate as the climate changes," the report said. "Climate change is likely to exacerbate all of the traditional threats to wildlife, as well as introducing new ones." 
 Jordan Konek sees the same dangers in Nunavut, where he has interviewed Inuit elders for films and blogs. "The Canadian government is ignoring how people are experiencing climate change," he said. "It's obvious that our climate is changing. The snow is coming a lot later now. We'll be losing our hunting culture." 

Load-Date: December 5, 2011


End of Document




Ottawa urged to lead business on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
April 28, 2012 Saturday, National Edition


Copyright 2012 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; REPORT; Pg. A5
Length: 497 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY
Dateline: OTTAWA 
Body


 GLOBAL ENERGY REPORTER 
 An advisory group that was axed in the recent federal budget says Ottawa needs to show more leadership in encouraging businesses to prepare for the impacts of climate change. 
 The National Round Table on the Economy and Environment was created by former prime minister Brian Mulroney 25 years ago but, in last month's budget, was given a year to wind down its operations. 
 Environment Minister Peter Kent justified the elimination of the round table - whose members were appointed by the government - by saying similar work is available from other think tanks and on the Internet. 
 In areport released Friday, the panel said climate change is real and its impacts are already being felt across Canada and the world. 
 "The capacity of and actions by businesses to adapt to the impacts of changing climate conditions - both average and extreme - will shape Canada's future economic prosperity," the report said. 
 And government will need to provide regulatory and financial incentives - as well as additional research - to encourage corporate leaders to prepare their businesses for the inevitable impacts of a changed climate, including flooding in some regions, droughts in others and extreme weather. 
 In effect, Canadians need to prepare for the effects of global warming even as they strive to reduce emissions in order to lessen the severity of the shifting climate patterns, round-table president David McLaughlin said. 
 "This is saying you are going to be exposed regardless - there is going to be climate change, there is going to be warming because of the emissions that are already up there, and it's only going to increase," Mr. McLaughlin said. 
 "Because of the uncertainty of it, because of the extreme volatile nature, you need to get ready and be prepared. It's not an environmental issue in this context, it's a bottom-line issue, it's a core-business issue." 
 The round table has previously warned the federal government that its adaptation effort was going to leave the country vulnerable to severe climate impact, and that its policies to date are insufficient to meet its own target of reducing emissions by 17 per cent from 2005 levels by 2020. 
 Mr. McLaughlin - a former chief of staff to Finance Minister Jim Flaherty - said businesses will be looking to government to provide leadership on the climate change issue. 
 "If government isn't concerned, that does send a signals to a lot of businesses who may not have a lot of resources to deal with it, to say it is not a priority for now," he said. 
 He wouldn't comment on whether the elimination of the round table was evidence of a lack of leadership. But he said the group performs an important function not only in research, but in bringing together businesses and other experts to address issues of sustainable development. 
 The round table will produce two more reports before it closes its doors next March 31, including one that will assess the various provincial climate programs. 

Load-Date: April 28, 2012


End of Document




Kunuk's done what no one else has: listened to the elders; The Fast Runner director skips the 'experts,' going directly to Inuit elders, and discovers their alarming views on climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 20, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: THE GLOBE REVIEW; DOCUMENTARY / CLIMATE CHANGE; Pg. R1
Length: 938 words
Byline: GUY DIXON
Body


 Imagine how this feels: The land and weather are turning erratic and dangerous. Warmer, unpredictable winds are coming from strange directions. Severe floods threaten to wash away towns. And native animals, the food supply, aren't behaving as they used to, their bodies less capable in the changing climate. 
 Even stranger is the fact that the sun now appears to set many kilometres off its usual point on the horizon, and the stars are no longer where they should be. Is the Earth shifting on its axis, causing the very look of the sun and stars to change? 
 These are the drastic conditions Northern Canadians, whose lives depend from childhood on their knowledge of the most minute details of the Arctic land and skies, say they see all around them. These observations by Inuit elders are detailed in a groundbreaking new documentary, Inuit Knowledge and Climate Change, by acclaimed Nunavut filmmaker Zacharias Kunuk (The Fast Runner, The Journals of Knud Rasmussen) and environmental scientist Ian Mauro. 
 The documentary - screening at Toronto's imagineNATIVE film and media arts festival this weekend and streaming live at isuma.tv - is the first to ask Inuit elders to describe the severe environmental changes in the Arctic they are seeing and to do so in their own language. The tone of the film is intimate. The elders aren't trying to cross a language barrier, or even speak to the Southern scientific community. They're simply imparting their expert knowledge and wisdom - and the result will undoubtedly cause controversy. 
 "Over the years, nobody has ever listened to these people. Every time [the discussion is] about global warming, about the Arctic warming, it's scientists that go up there and do their work. And policy makers depend on these findings. Nobody ever really understands the people up there," Kunuk says. 
 It quickly becomes clear that the film, which blends scenes of Inuit life with elders sharing their insights, is an invaluable document. The elders describe in precise detail how seals, for instance, a staple in their diet, are behaving troublingly due to the thinning ice, how warmer winds are changing the snow and ice banks, making overland navigation difficult, and how major floods are hitting communities. 
 Yet the elders talk about all this without anger, only a tinge of sadness. Kunuk says this is an Inuit characteristic, based on the belief that the world is forever changing, whether at the hand of man or through natural cycles. "We know for a fact that way up in the high Arctic, there are mummified tree trunks [showing that the Earth's climate was once totally different]. Also, when Inuit hunters talk about animals, they always talk about cycles, everything goes in cycles. We just have to adapt to it." 
 However, the faintest trace of anger does arise when the elders talk about polar bears. Contrary to what conservationists and scientists say, the elders interviewed in the film believe the polar-bear population is increasing. They say more bears finding their way into communities, and the animals are being traumatized by scientists, who are putting radio collars around the bears' necks and doing other research that disturbs their natural life, usually spent in almost total isolation and silence. 
 Most startling for the filmmakers, though, was the Inuits' belief that along with pollution and environmental changes, caused mainly by Southerners, the Earth has actually changed its tilt. The filmmakers kept hearing this theory in different communities. Perplexed, they contacted the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration for answers, but experts said this was impossible. 
 When the filmmakers presented some of their findings at the Copenhagen conference on climate change last year, the media picked up on these views of the Inuit subjects, film co-director Ian Mauro says, and alarm bells started to ring in the scientific community. "We had a litany of scientists come back to us, responding after seeing this news, saying, 'This was great to be speaking to indigenous people about their views, but if you continue to perpetuate this fallacy that the Earth had tilted on its axis, [the Inuit] .... would lose all credibility.' And so there was really this backlash by the scientific community." 
 Still, the Inuit insist they see changes in the sun's course and the position of the stars in the night sky. "These elders, when they were growing up, they were told to go out every morning, before having anything to eat. They were told to go out at the age of 5 every morning to observe the weather," Kunuk says. "So when they started talking about the sun and the sunset, I was puzzled too. Everywhere I went, each community, I was getting the same answer: The sun does not settle where it used to. I mean, it [causes] alarm." 
 The scientific explanation is that the warming Arctic air is causing temperature inversions, which in turn cause the light to refract so that the sun appears to be setting a few kilometres off-kilter. "There is so much garbage in the air, it's refraction that's causing our elders to think our world has tilted," Kunuk says. 
 But the filmmakers don't include that scientific explanation in the film. Instead, the documentary deals strictly with the elders' observations and their belief that they simply have to adapt. 
 "We have to. We have no choice," Kunuk says, repeating the elders' quiet words. 
Inuit Knowledge and Climate Change plays Toronto's Al Green Theatre, 750 Spadina Ave., Saturday at 7 p.m., as part of the imagineNATIVE film and media arts festival. The film will be simultaneously streamed on www.isuma.tv.

Load-Date: October 20, 2010


End of Document




Climate change creating vast glacial lakes: researcher
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 2, 2020 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 413 words
Body


Lead
Meltwater from shrinking glaciers is creating vast lakes that could eventually pose an enormous flooding threat, says newly published research.
"Unsurprisingly, we found those lakes are growing," said Dan Shugar, a geographer at the University of Calgary. "What was surprising was how much."
Texte/Text
The fact that glaciers around the world are shrinking because of climate change is well established. What hasn't been so well studied is where all that water is going.
In a paper published Monday in Nature Climate Change, Dr.
Shugar and his colleagues provide the first global assessment of how much water is contained in what are known as glacial lakes and how quickly that volume is increasing.
That assessment wasn't possible until a few years ago, when computers finally became powerful enough to work through a world's worth of data and 250,000 satellite images.
Glacial lakes form when meltwater from glaciers is prevented from draining by the ice itself.
They form on top, in front, beside or even underneath a glacier.
They are growing at a rapid pace everywhere glaciers are found. Dr. Shugar and his colleagues estimate that the amount of water those lakes hold has increased by almost 50 per cent since 1990.
The total volume is calculated to be an almost-unimaginable 158 cubic kilometres of water.
That's a cube of icy cold water almost 5.5 kilometres long, wide and high.
Many glacial lakes are located in thinly inhabited locales such as Greenland. Others are in places such as the Himalayas, where they sit alongside villages and communities.
Canadian glacial lakes are swelling as well.
Their volume across the country, including those in the High Arctic, has increased about 20 per cent and they hold about 37 cubic kilometres of water, Dr.
Shugar said. The lakes in British Columbia and Yukon have increased even more quickly, almost doubling in volume over the past 30 years to 21 cubic kilometres.
They can present a hazard. Because the water is only held back by ice, glacial lakes are prone to sudden events called glacial lake outburst floods.
"In western North America, the risks aren't as high [as the Himalayas], but they certainly aren't zero," Dr. Shugar said.
And when they go, they go "absolutely gargantuan," Dr. Shugar said.
Dr. Shugar said he's not able to tell yet if GLOFs, as they are known, are becoming more frequent.
But he warns that water managers are going to have to keep an eye out for them as climate change continues to melt glaciers and fill lakes.

Load-Date: September 2, 2020


End of Document




Climate change is quickly filling glacial lakes that could cause severe flooding, study finds
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 2, 2020 Wednesday, British Columbia Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 495 words
Body


Lead
Meltwater from shrinking glaciers is creating vast lakes that could eventually pose an enormous flooding threat, says newly published research.
"Unsurprisingly, we found those lakes are growing," said Dan Shugar, a geographer at the University of Calgary. "What was surprising was how much."
Texte/Text
The fact that glaciers around the world are shrinking because of climate change is well established. What hasn't been so well studied is where all that water is going.
In a paper published Monday in Nature Climate Change, Dr. Shugar and his colleagues provide the first global assessment of how much water is contained in what are known as glacial lakes and how quickly that volume is increasing.
That assessment wasn't possible until a few years ago, when computers finally became powerful enough to work through a world's worth of data and 250,000 satellite images.
Glacial lakes form when meltwater from glaciers is prevented from draining by the ice itself. They form on top, in front, beside or even underneath a glacier.
They are growing at a rapid pace everywhere glaciers are found. Dr. Shugar and his colleagues estimate that the amount of water those lakes hold has increased by almost 50 per cent since 1990.
The total volume is calculated to be an almost-unimaginable 158 cubic kilometres of water. That's a cube of icy cold water almost 5.5 kilometres long, wide and high.
Many glacial lakes are located in thinly inhabited locales such as Greenland. Others are in places such as the Himalayas, where they sit alongside villages and communities.
Canadian glacial lakes are swelling as well. Their volume across the country, including those in the High Arctic, has increased about 20 per cent and they hold about 37 cubic kilometres of water, Dr. Shugar said. The lakes in British Columbia and Yukon have increased even more quickly, almost doubling in volume over the past 30 years to 21 cubic kilometres.
They can present a hazard. Because the water is only held back by ice, glacial lakes are prone to sudden events called glacial lake outburst floods.
"In western North America, the risks aren't as high [as the Himalayas], but they certainly aren't zero," Dr. Shugar said.
And when they go, they go "absolutely gargantuan," Dr.
Shugar said.
In 1996, an outburst flood in Iceland created what was for a couple of days the second-biggest river in the world. A 1930s outburst from the Chong Khumdan glacier in the Karakoram Range sent a wall of water, mud and debris nearly 26 metres high down the Indus River for about 1,500 kilometres.
Dr. Shugar said he's not able to tell yet if GLOFs, as they are known, are becoming more frequent.
But he warns that water managers are going to have to keep an eye out for them as climate change continues to melt glaciers and fill lakes.
"Even here in the Rockies we may see increased development of these lakes," Dr. Shugar said. "This is an evolving hazardous landscape. This is something that needs to be constantly revisited."

Load-Date: September 2, 2020


End of Document




OPINION; Accountability motions lay important foundation for fighting climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 27, 2019 Saturday, British Columbia Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 801 words
Byline: STEPAN WOOD
Body


Canada Research Chair in Law, Society and Sustainability and Director of the Centre for Law and the Environment at the University of British Columbia
Last month, Vancouver became the largest Canadian municipality to pass a climate-accountability motion. The motion commits the city to write letters to the 20 biggest carbon majors - global fossilfuel companies whose products have made the largest contributions to global warming - asking them to pay a fair share of Vancouver's costs of dealing with the impact of climate change.
Among people who agree that the climate-change crisis requires urgent action on all fronts, there are skeptics who doubt that climate-accountability motions are the way to go.
They worry that such motions will inhibit the co-operation necessary to meet the climate challenge, that pursuing carbon majors is hypocritical when everyone uses fossil fuels and that climate-accountability litigation is an inefficient use of local governments' scarce resources.
These are valid concerns, but they do not render climate-accountability motions counterproductive.
First, demanding accountability is consistent with a commitment to co-operation. This requires willing partners who can make credible commitments they consider fair and that they trust each other to fulfill.
The carbon majors knew for decades that their products cause climate change, yet they fought emission reductions and misled the public about climate science. They have not shown themselves to be willing partners capable of making credible commitments to combat climate change and accelerate the low-carbon transition.
Demands for climate accountability signal local communities' resolve that co-operation to manage the impact of climate change must be based on trustworthy commitments and a fair allocation of burdens.
Asking the world's largest fossil-fuel companies for accountability is not an attack on Alberta and the Canadian energy sector. It provides a foundation for constructive engagement, helps to level the global playing field and rewards Canadian companies that invest in the low-carbon transition.
This brings us to the second objection. Is it hypocritical to blame big oil companies when ordinary people's insatiable demand for fossil fuels, abetted by municipal governments' planning decisions, drove emissions growth?
No. Certainly, choices by local governments and ordinary people contributed to the climate crisis. And all governments have a responsibility to take whatever measures they can to curb demand. But even the most aggressive action by Canadian local communities could not have prevented climate change.
By contrast, nearly 30 per cent of all anthropogenic carbon emissions are attributable to the 20 global companies addressed by climateaccountability letters.
Aggressive action by these companies could have helped to avert the climate emergency.
Instead, these companies fuelled demand for their products while misleading the public about the risks, resisting policies to curb emissions and pocketing billions in public subsidies.
Climate-accountability letters do not ask carbon majors to pay the entire local costs of climate change, only their fair share. What that share should be is a question that can be resolved through negotiation or, as a last resort, litigation.
Finally, climate-accountability motions are a prudent use of local governments' scarce resources. Local governments are on the front lines of climate change. Even if global temperature rise is kept under 2 C, they face billions of dollars in costs to prepare public infrastructure and services for climate impact, and to repair climate-related damage.
As prudent managers of public funds and infrastructure, local governments should explore all reasonable avenues to recover those costs so they don't fall entirely on taxpayers.
Some skeptics worry that litigation is too slow and expensive. But climate-accountability motions do not commit municipalities to litigation; they launch a discussion about the fair allocation of local costs.
Moreover, litigation is often effective at kick-starting wider changes and can be a valuable part of a multipronged strategy.
Skeptics also worry that the legal case for climate accountability is weak. But 28 of Canada's leading legal experts recently signed an open letter saying that climate-accountability litigation has a credible legal basis, which could be further enhanced by federal or provincial legislation addressing certain legal hurdles.
Climate-accountability motions can lay a foundation for co-operation, start an honest discussion about fair sharing of the burdens of climate change and support local governments' prudent stewardship of public resources.
They should be welcomed by anyone who agrees that the climate-change crisis requires urgent action on all fronts.

Load-Date: July 27, 2019


End of Document




Aid package a climate-change signal to big corporations; Ottawa targets oil patch with stringent rules to disclose climate-related risks
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 13, 2020 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B1
Length: 928 words
Byline: JEFFREY JONES, ILL CURRY
Dateline: CALGARY, OTTAWA 
Body


Many big Canadian companies, notably those involved in resource extraction, will have to adopt much more detailed disclosure of climate risks to their businesses if they intend to take advantage of Ottawa's newest package of emergency credit support.
The federal government's Large Employer Emergency Financing Facility (LEEFF), announced on Monday, is aimed at large companies that are at risk of financial failure because of the impact of COVID-19.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said on Tuesday that the condition had been added because not all big companies have embraced the move to disclose climate risks.
"There are many companies in the energy sector that are already taking seriously the need to plan for the longer term, to plan for reducing emissions and fighting climate change. But not all of them," Mr. Trudeau said.
"And that's why we needed to make sure that as we moved forward on support for large employers across all sectors, that they are also - in all sectors, not just in the energy sector - thinking about the challenge that climate change will pose to their company and to their future and have a response for it."
The still un-costed loan program comes with a long list of restrictions. Applicants must agree to "strict" limits on dividends, share buybacks and executive pay. Companies will also have to publish annual climate-related disclosure reports consistent with the international Financial Stability Board's Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures.
They will also have to show how their operations support Canada's national climate-change goals.
Currently, few Canadian companies issue climate reports with the stringency set out by the task force, which developed its standards while former Bank of Canada governor Mark Carney was Financial Stability Board (FSB) chair and governor of the Bank of England.
"This is going to be a meaningful obligation for companies to take on as a condition to access any of these resources," said Andrew MacDougall, a lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, who specializes in corporate climate-risk reporting. "If you're going to take on the support, you're going to, essentially, really up your game in disclosure in a way that really doesn't exist right now for the vast majority of companies."
The loan program is aimed at companies with $300-million or more in annual revenues that are seeking financing of at least $60million. Finance Minister Bill Morneau said the program will be "very important" for airlines such as Air Canada or Westjet, as well as for companies in the energy sector.
Many of the details have yet to be explained. It follows billions of dollars of other federal programs to help companies and their employees bridge the financial collapse caused by the pandemic and restrictions on movement imposed to deal with it. Critics have raised questions about whether the government is pushing its environmental agenda at the expense of struggling companies.
FSB requirements are more comprehensive than those set out in Canadian securities laws.
In Canada, for instance, a public company must disclose environmental policies related to operations, as well as the board's mandate on the issue and its standingcommittee functions.
The FSB standards include such requirements as explaining the role of executives in assessing environmental risks and how they are integrated into overall corporate risk management.
There are also industry-specific standards based on varying degrees and types of climate risk.
Alberta Finance Minister Travis Toews said "the devil's in the details," but he doesn't envision the reporting requirements being too difficult or expensive for the province's energy companies.
"Canada as a whole has been very responsible from an environmental and social-governance standpoint, and certainly the large-cap companies already do significant reporting in this regard," he said.
However, of the 55 Canadian companies, governments and professional organizations that are listed as supporters of the FSB task force, there are only two companies that produce oil - Suncor Energy Inc. and Teck Resources Ltd. Most are in the financial-services and pensions sectors, and so they are not eligible for the LEEFF program.
Cenovus Energy Inc., an oil sands producer, said it has used the task-force standards as a basis for climate disclosures as part of its environmental, social and governance reporting for the past three years.
Numerous companies publish voluntary sustainability reports, with varying levels of disclosure, Mr. MacDougall said. "They provide a limited amount of detail about what the company is doing.
They're not done with a particular set of standards or guidelines to the disclosure, so in practice it can be a bit mixed," he said.
Canadian Securities Administrators, in a 2018 report, said a number of large companies that produce voluntary reports expressed concern about the cost and staff numbers required for them.
However, Paul Boothe, a former senior Environment Canada official and retired academic who specializes in debt management and public finance, said the disclosure stipulations should not prove too onerous for companies that must make use of the program. He said they already face increasing scrutiny from shareholders and regulators on climate risks and responses.
"I think the federal government wants their loans to be consistent with their environmental policies, but I don't see that as being otherwise restrictive for a large publicly traded company.
Some of them are leaders in this," he said.
With reports from Emma Graney in Calgary

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Vancouver asks for climate change aid; According to the Union of B.C. Municipalities, climate change is not an 'eligible project category' under new federal funding
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
May 27, 2014 Tuesday, British Columbia Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. S1
Length: 697 words
Byline: JUSTIN GIOVANNETTI
Dateline: VANCOUVER 
Body


On the morning of Dec. 17, 2012, a rare king tide pushed the Pacific Ocean over the sea wall by Kitsilano pool, flooding the popular recreation area and causing the nearby beach to disappear.
While the water soon retreated and caused no lasting damage, the extreme tide served as a wake-up call for local officials. With sea level expected to increase by half a metre midway through this century, the extreme tides seen that morning could be the normal water level in only 30 years.
City staff are calling for federal aid to help Vancouver prepare for the long-term impact of climate change.
While funding for expensive new infrastructure will be required over the next few decades, officials say Ottawa doesn't support even inexpensive, current planning efforts. The lack of financial aid is compounded by a lack of organization in the federal bureaucracy, according to deputy city manager Sadhu Johnston.
"There is no clear funding program to ask. It's not even clear what department to ask," said Mr. Johnston, who was poached from Chicago to head the city's environmental efforts. "If we are going to protect our residents, infrastructure and economy, we need a one-stop shop in the federal government for this."
On May 22, the federal government signed a 10-year deal to continue turning over parts of the federal gas-tax fund to B.C. cities, totalling $2.7-billion by 2024. While traditional projects such as roads, airports and arenas are covered, the money can also be spent on disaster mitigation.
According to the Union of B.C. Municipalities, climate change is not an "eligible project category" under the new federal funding structure.While flooding last year in Calgary and Toronto has served as a graphic preview of a world facing more extreme weather, Vancouver faces a grimmer situation. The city is one of the world's most exposed ports to damages from sea-level rise, with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ranking Vancouver 15th out of 136 large port cities for future risks.
Current flooding projections show a dire future for much of the Lower Mainland. By the end of the century, Vancouver's airport, as well as large swaths of Richmond and Surrey, could look like the Netherlands, lying below sea level and protected only by an extensive network of dikes.
Aaron Jasper says he worries about the choices that his successors will face as chair of Vancouver's park board. With his current term ending, Mr. Jasper will not stand for re-election. He says his budgets have been stretched by projects to refurbish existing infrastructure. During his time heading the parks board he says conversations have turned increasingly to climate change and the need for new infrastructure.
"I don't envy the challenges future boards will face," he said on the phone as his one-year-old son cries in the background.
"Having children brings urgency to it. I grew up here and I wonder if I'll be telling my kids what it was once like when we had a beach at Kitsilano."
At high tide, the water now laps just below the concrete sea wall in Kitsilano. Mr. Jasper expects talk will soon turn to building up the existing walls. Some in the parks department have begun talking openly about the need for an unpopular extension of the sea wall beyond its current terminus near the Kitsilano Pool.
Released two weeks ago, the U.S. National Climate Assessment raised alarm over the fast retreat of the glaciers across B.C. The glaciers in the Rocky Mountains are expected to disappear by the end of the century. According to a University of Victoria study the smaller glaciers on Vancouver Island will disappear completely within 25 years.
To face a changing environment, Vancouver has already started a number of changes to the city's permitting process. Generators must be moved to higher floors in large buildings and the city now "strongly recommends" that oceanfront construction be one metre higher - current provincial estimates show a one-metre increase in sea levels by the end of the century.
However larger investments will require federal aid. "Whether it be building dikes, flood gates or raising streets, there will be clear investments required," Mr. Johnston said.

Load-Date: May 27, 2014


End of Document




OPINION; Why I'm taking my government to court on climate change; We are not suing for financial reparations, but to secure a legally binding, science-based climate recovery plan that will protect our lives and the lives of future generations across the country, Jacob Lebel writes
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 3, 2018 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. O8
Length: 1129 words
Byline: Jacob Lebel
Body


Jacob Lebel lives in Roseburg, Ore.
W ould you deprive your children of water, food or a safe home in which to live? Imagine an elected government that has free rein to sell away these basic resources from its youngest and most vulnerable citizens simply because no one stepped up to hold them in check.
This is exactly what the U.S.
government under the Trump administration is doing through its federal energy policies. That is why I'm a plaintiff in Juliana v.
United States, the constitutional climate lawsuit brought by 21 young people against the U.S.
government. We are not suing for financial reparations, but to secure a legally-binding sciencebased climate recovery plan that will protect our lives and the lives of future generations across the country.
Growing up, I never thought I would become an "activist," much less sue my government.
When I was four years old, my family moved from my birthplace of Quebec to a small rural town in Oregon because of its mild climate. We started an organic farm there and I grew up with clear skies and the beautiful wilderness of this country. We grow or raise nearly all of our own food from the land.
Over the past several summers, severe wildfires have burned around our farm and filled my lungs with smoke. Air quality in the Pacific Northwest declined to levels worse than in Beijing and forced me to wear a breathing mask outside for days.
Fire season in my home has increased from 23 days in the 1960s to over 120 days in recent years.
Scientists predict that, even with only 1 degree of warming, wildfires will burn five to six times as much land area annually in the region around my farm.
In addition, a company called Jordan Cove is seeking federal permits to build a natural gas pipeline one mile away from our farm. If built, the pipeline and associated power plant would be the biggest greenhouse gas emitter in Oregon.
Decisions to permit pipelines such as Jordan Cove are only one example of how the government ultimately controls the fossil fuel energy system that produces emissions. Decades before I was born, the U.S. government had hard scientific evidence of the threat posed by emissions and yet they continue to incentivize coal over renewables and lease public lands for oil extraction.
Through these and other direct actions, the U.S. government is promoting dangerous levels of fossil fuel emissions, causing climate change, and thereby violating the constitutional rights of young people to life, liberty and property.
On Monday, Oct. 29, I was supposed to be at the United States District Court for the District of Oregon participating in opening arguments for our landmark trial. The 21 of us had waited for more than three years for that moment - our day in court. Instead, with one week to go to trial, the Supreme Court temporarily placed our case on hold at the request of the Trump administration. This evasion is just the latest in a series of desperate attempts by our government to avoid facing us in a court of law.
At every step of the way, the courts have ruled to allow us to proceed to trial.
We are confident that we will ultimately be allowed to present the climate science at trial, but every delay costs time we no longer have. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) says humanity has just over a decade to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions to avoid catastrophic climate change.
Since we filed this lawsuit, hundreds of conifer trees have died from drought stress on my farm due to a warming climate.
My friend and co-plaintiff Jayden Foytlin's house was flooded in the historic Louisiana floods of 2016 that were worsened by climate change.
Another one of my co-plaintiffs, Levi Draheim, 11, lives on a barrier island in Florida. Worsening hurricanes have driven him from his home in repeated evacuations and the red tides from warming waters are landing hundreds of dead sea creatures on his favorite beach. The IPCC report predicts a sea level rise that would engulf his home by the time he is 50 years old.
People often ask me how we manage to retain our hope and motivation when faced with the reality of what is happening to our planet and our futures. The fact is: We do have feasible, scientifically-tested solutions.
World-renowned scientists and experts are testifying in our lawsuit that we could meet our country's energy demands entirely from solar, wind and other renewable sources. We just need to hold our political branches accountable.
Our current situation demands that we act. Sixty per cent of all the wildlife on earth has been wiped out since 1970. It is no longer acceptable to simply be "aware." We can't all sue our governments, but neither will we solve climate change by arguing on social media or projecting our own individualized vision of solutions. It is only through collective, conscious actions that we will find the wisdom and community necessary to build new cities, new ways of governing that protect our freedoms and new ways of relating to each other and the earth.
My fellow plaintiffs and I can stand on the steps of the federal courthouses and appear on television and have the world hear our voices only because other human beings acted on countless small decisions striving toward a greater good every single day. Our families planted and nurtured the seeds of our values.
The civil rights activists and patriots who paved the way so we could bring this lawsuit did so with their blood, as did the Indigenous people that have led the way with wisdom through centuries of injustice. In Canada, just as much as in the United States, it has never been more important for all people to put themselves on the line to enact systemic change.
Our hope is based in these actions. It does not fluctuate with the latest tweets from U.S. President Donald Trump or delays in our lawsuit. It comes from knowing that times have been dark before - and that sometimes our courts and judicial institutions have been that shining light that ushered in a new era of freedom.
We are hopeful because in our actions to protect the things we love we found our place as citizens of a country and of a planet.
Even if the only thing you can do is tiny, it is the will that counts. None of us plaintiffs knew that our first small actions - attending a city council meeting, throwing a fundraising party for snow leopards, planting a garden, watching an Al Gore movie - would lead to us changing the global debate on climate change.
To decide to act in simple ways, every day, on a human scale to address a problem of such magnitude as climate change is to recognize your limitations, and to accept that you will not change the world. If you let it, it is the love and sacrifice and beauty that is already in this world that will change you - as it has changed us.

Load-Date: November 3, 2018


End of Document




OPINION; How the coronavirus will reveal the need for change in how Ottawa tackles climate change
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
March 7, 2020 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B2
Length: 805 words
Byline: ADAM RADWANSKI, Staff
Body


So much for this year's federal budget being all about environmental and energy policy.
Never mind what the Liberals have been foreshadowing through the winter, after coming away from the fall election convinced that climate change is what now motivates their voters.
They didn't count on the COVID-19 virus overtaking all else, as a global economic threat on top of a health one. It now seems more inevitable by the day that Finance Minister Bill Morneau will largely be pressed to explain how he will blunt the virus's financial impact and account for emergency costs, while dealing with its potentially large hit to revenues.
The shifting focus stands to be cause for considerable frustration among environmentalists who have spent decades trying to get governments to take a more urgent approach to climate action - only to see that urgency, when finally materializing, take a backseat to an emergency less threatening to humanity in the long run.
But taking into account other events that have distracted the Liberals from the focus they thought they'd have in the early months of their new mandate - among them the downing of Flight 752 in Iran and pipeline protests primarily related to First Nations rights - there is a takeaway here about how a serious effort to reduce emissions needs to be sustained over a very long trajectory.
It's nice to imagine that, because of climate change's existential threat, it will steadily get more focus from government and the public alike. But it's not likely to work that way - since the effects of the threat aren't currently felt in most Canadians' day-to-day lives. There will often be something with more immediate stakes.
So if governments are to succeed at putting and keeping the country on a path to dramatically reduced emissions, they will require an ability to orient themselves around policies that aren't the flashiest at any given moment - something that doesn't come naturally to politicians and staffers who want to show leadership on the biggest challenges of the day.
There will be times when climate change is the hot file; it seemed to be, coming out of the election. But it can't be prioritized only when it has the run of the news cycle - not given the consistently swift progress that is needed to stave off catastrophe, and with the fragmented approach now being taken.
If governments put in place a small number of drastic policies aimed at steady emissions reduction - a very high carbon price being the obvious example - they could more easily turn their attention elsewhere while these policies took effect. But Mr. Trudeau's Liberals and most anyone else trying to tackle climate change are instead counting on pulling a great many levers to meet 2030 Paris Agreement or 2050 net-zero targets.
In short order, Ottawa is supposed to be steadily rolling out transportation electrification and building retrofit programs, supports for clean-technology sectors, a marketbased mechanism to make fuels less carbon-intensive, a massive tree-planting plan, and lots else besides. In most cases these policies, after being implemented, are supposed to steadily get more ambitious.
That's all going to necessitate a lot of articulation to Canadians from the Prime Minister about how it fits together. But what it will also require, largely missing to date, are systems that allow the effort to maintain momentum even when his attention is elsewhere.
Such systemic changes could take many forms: Perhaps a cabinet restructuring that would give an environment minister greater trust and responsibility to steer policies. Or the creation of quasi-independent agencies or oversight bodies, aimed at some degree of climate-policy depoliticization and in turn greater consistency. Or, at least, empowered teams of senior officials within the Prime Minister's Office or Privy Council Office, solely focused on steering climate policies through government, regardless of what else is going on.
It's not that, without something along these lines, all climate policy development completely grinds to a halt. It's a matter of pace, for a government that purports to consider climate change an emergency, whatever else is happening in the news.
Mr. Morneau's budget will be a case in point: Most of the climate-related commitments he has already planned, such as infrastructure investments or measures around disclosure of climate-related financial risks, will remain in the document even if they get less public emphasis because of the coronavirus.
But as usual in a budget, much of what's announced will require followup before it's actually implemented.
It will have to happen fast, for Ottawa to move on to whatever is next in its plan to meet its targets. And it will need laser-like focus from people who aren't preoccupied with the coronavirus, or the next crisis to come along after it.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




As climate change looms over the coming federal election, Canada's energy industry needs to clean up its act
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
August 24, 2019 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B6
Length: 3935 words
Byline: SHAWN McCARTHY, Staff
Body


In a sprawling building in the industrial southeast of Calgary, a team of technicians is trying to win a race the Canadian oil patch can't afford to lose.
The men and women in blue coats are huddled over a pressurized vessel that simulates the process of extracting oil from the thick mixture of rock-hard bitumen and sand that makes up the oil sands. Their mission is to test new ways to get the oil out, using solvents to liquefy the bitumen and make it easier to recover from underground reservoirs.
The process uses less energy and water than current methods - and, as a result, produces fewer greenhouse gas emissions.
Working with a variety of solvents, the team at Imperial Oil Ltd.'s research centre feeds bitumen into a reservoir box and injects small doses of liquid to determine which compound - combined with steam or on its own - is most effective at freeing the bitumen from sand. What they discover will be further tested in a pilot project on oil sands deposits near Fort McMurray, Alta.
The work, overseen by engineer Cheryl Trudell, is part of a broader, $1-billion-a-year, industrywide research effort to make the oil sands more competitive, with lower costs and less harmful to the environment. It involves an unprecedented level of co-operation among the major oil sands producers, rivals that now must work together to make progress in reducing carbon emissions - and quickly. They understand that climate change - and the fate of their industry in a world trying to limit its environmental effects - will be a key issue in the coming federal election and for years to come.
At stake are the growth prospects for an industry that has been a major driver of the Canadian economy. Oil sands production has doubled in the past decade to three million barrels a day. Almost all of the country's estimated 167 billion barrels of crude reserves are in the oil sands. It's expensive and takes a lot of water and energy to get the oil out - thus Canada's reputation as a producer of oil with a high carbon footprint.
Rarely has the energy industry faced a more urgent need to solve that problem and change its image. Failure to clean up oil sands production could consign companies to moribund share prices and a slow death as the world seeks to wean itself off the most carbon-intensive energy sources.
Faced with concerns about a growing climate crisis, institutional investors are increasingly demanding that fossilfuel companies demonstrate how they can prosper if the world succeeds in cutting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Oil sands producers operate a capital-intensive business that depends on those investors, including banks and pension funds, for financing.
Meanwhile, governments around the world are pushing policies aimed at dramatically reducing the demand for crude over the coming decades, including tougher fuel efficiency standards for cars and trucks and incentives for electric vehicles to displace those fuelled by gasoline and diesel.
So time is ticking. In their market value, energy producers include oil sands reserves that won't be developed for another decade or two. For those reserves to remain valuable, companies such as Imperial and Suncor Energy Inc. will need to be among the low-cost, low-carbon crude producers in world markets.
A better environmental record might also be the best way for the oil industry to shield itself from politics. In Canada, the future of climate-change policy will depend on the outcome of the federal election this fall. The governing Liberals are determined to maintain a cap on overall oil sands emissions and a regulated price on emissions; the Conservatives have a more industry-friendly approach that includes lighter regulations and no emissions cap; and the Greens and New Democrats both propose more aggressive efforts to cut oil sands emissions.
Regardless of who wins, oil-patch executives say they will continue to drive down emissions per barrel, that they are well aware the global pressure to address climate change is only likely to increase. They have no choice if they're going to win back an investment community that is increasingly skeptical about what they have to sell.
The producers are making some progress. The industry on average has cut emissions per barrel of crude produced - known as "carbon intensity" - by 22 per cent since 2012, according to a recent Bank of Montreal study. But overall emissions have grown dramatically in the past decade along with oil production.
Indeed, oil sands companies, led by Imperial, Suncor, Cenovus Energy Inc. and Canadian Natural Resources Ltd., say they should gain a competitive edge from carbon regulations and their own efforts to reduce emissions. They are among the few global oil companies that operate with an explicit carbon price, as well as legislation that will cap their emissions, Suncor chief executive Mark Little noted in a recent interview.
"If you believe that carbon is having an impact [on the environment], which we certainly do, then you start aligning your thinking and your investment and your organization to address that challenge," Mr. Little said. "We are doing that."
The companies are working together on environmental technologies in ways rarely seen in industry. Their sevenyear effort through the Canada's Oil Sands Innovation Alliance is starting to pay dividends, as they begin using technology that was developed jointly, at times with financial backing from provincial and federal governments. CNRL and Cenovus are also using carbon-capture technologies that either store CO2 underground or use it in other products or for other purposes.
Both companies have purchased or built facilities that capture carbon from oil extraction and refining to prevent it from escaping into the atmosphere.
Mr. Little says the oil sands sector can drive its carbon intensity below the international average, and others in the Canadian industry agree. If so, exported Canadian oil could displace dirtier oil from other countries, which would put the industry on a sounder footing with investors.
But a recent study by Stanford University economists suggests there is still a long way to go.
And cuts to carbon-per-barrel measures don't impress environmentalists much.
They look at the total amount of GHG emissions coming from the sector, and the oil sands industry remains the fastest-growing source in Canada. Even with the projected improvements, emissions are expected to climb through the next decade as Alberta pumps out even more crude.
Even by the industry's preferred measure of emissions per barrel, the oil patch doesn't stack up very well, critics say. A peer-reviewed study by Stanford researchers last year rated the Canadian oil industry the fourth-most carbon-intensive of 50 countries, trailing only Cameroon, Venezuela and Algeria and far worse than that of the United States. Based on 2015 data, Canada was almost 70 per cent above the global average, the researchers found, although they qualified that by saying poor data from some countries skewed those results.
"The talking points about cleanest oil are just not accurate for GHGs," said Simon Dyer, executive director at the Pembina Institute in Calgary. "If we want to be leaders in GHG, we're going to have to do much, much more." He said companies tend to tout their newest projects and future prospects for best-in-class examples of GHG intensity, rather than measuring the environmental impact of the industry as a whole.
Oil companies will have to accelerate their efforts if they are to survive in a world that must cut fossil-fuel use to avert the most catastrophic effects of climate change, said a recent report from a federally appointed expert panel on sustainable finance. The panel, headed by former Bank of Canada deputy governor Tiff Macklem, warns that high-carbon industries face a heightened risk of having their assets devalued - unless they can come up with game-changing technologies to cut pollution.
The oil sands sector is already dealing with climate challenges that have harmed it financially.
Most obviously, there is the political opposition to new pipelines and the rising burden of government regulation on its activities. But it's also suffering from new attitudes from big money.
Swiss-based Zurich Insurance Group - which has an investment pool of US$200-billion - said in June that it would no longer underwrite or invest in oil sands companies or the pipelines and crude-by-rail facilities that support them unless they align their business plans with the effort to limit the increase in global temperatures to well below two degrees Celsius.
In doing so, Zurich joined a growing list of investors cutting their exposure to fossil fuels, notably coal and oil sands. Several banks and institutional investors - including the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec, Britain's HSBC Holdings PLC, Norway's sovereign-wealth fund and California's largest public-sector pension funds - have indicated they will shift their investment portfolios away from high-carbon companies.
The debate over the oil industry's future has fuelled some of the fiercest political battles of Justin Trudeau's government. The Liberals brought in a carbon levy and passed a law that requires most resource projects to be assessed on how they affect Canada's ability to meet its commitments to reduce GHG emissions. But the government also bought the Trans Mountain pipeline with a view to completing its expansion, adding 590,000 barrels a day of export capacity.
The October federal election will send a clear signal about the direction of climate and energy policy. The four leading oil companies, which account for three-quarters of total oil sands production, insist they will continue to work on the GHG problem, regardless of who is in power in Ottawa.
Whatever the political stripe of the new government, it will face some hard decisions, early on, about climate and the pace of energy development.
In 2005, the oil sands accounted for less than 5 per cent of Canada's GHG emissions. Next year, it will be 13 per cent, Environment Canada projects. That's because oil sands production has almost tripled in that time and is projected to hit 3.4 million b/d in 2020.
Assuming planned pipelines get built, producers could add another million b/d by 2030, says Kevin Birn, a Calgarybased analyst with IHS Markit Ltd., a global consultancy.
So GHG emissions keep going up, despite the new technologies that help make each barrel cleaner. In 2010, the sector generated 53 million tonnes (MT) of emissions. That may double to 106 MT by 2030, Environment Canada says.
(The former, NDP government in Alberta passed legislation capping oil sands emissions at 100 MT by 2030, but never enacted the regulations needed to enforce it.)
That presents a problem for Canada's commitments under the 2015 Paris accord on climate change, where the government promised to reduce overall GHG emissions to 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030. In fact, Canada is under pressure to increase the ambition of its targets. The United Nations will hold a climate summit in New York next month, where Secretary-General Antonio Guterres will urge all countries to do more than they pledged in Paris, because the commitments fall far short of what is required to limit the increase in global temperatures.
Environment Minister Catherine McKenna insists Canada can hit its targets - and even exceed them - while making room for growth in the oil sands as long as the 100 MT cap on emissions is honoured. But critics on the left and right challenge that assertion. At a Globe and Mail panel discussion in June, environmental activist Tzeporah Berman argued the projected growth in the oil sands should be restricted because it is inconsistent with Canada's responsibilities in fighting climate change. Seated beside her, former industry executive Dennis McConaghy agreed the goals are inconsistent but argued it is the country's Paris targets that need to be revisited.
Whichever party forms the next government faces a key decision on whether to approve Teck Resources Ltd.'s proposed Frontier oil sands mine, which would add 260,000 b/d of production and more than four million tonnes a year of carbon emissions. A joint federal-Alberta review panel recommended last month that the project get the green light, concluding that its economic benefits outweigh the "significant adverse" environmental effects. The panel noted, though, that the mine would make it harder for Canada to achieve its climate change goals.
The big four oil sands producers say they support the Paris agreement and have backed carbon pricing, as long as it is applied in a way that provides incentives for emission-reducing investments but doesn't make Canada uncompetitive with other oil-producing countries. They are particularly concerned about competition from the booming shale-oil sector in the United States, where investment continues to pour in. In contrast, investment in the oil sands has declined precipitously, to a projected $12-billion this year from $34billion in 2014.
In the short term, their environmental goals are relatively modest. Only Suncor has announced a medium-term target, aiming to cut its carbon intensity to 30 per cent below 2014 levels by 2030. CNRL says it is working on setting a 2030 target and has a long-term goal to become carbon neutral through the use of technologies to dramatically reduce emissions and capture the remaining CO2 for storage or use in new products.
"While we don't put a time frame on [achieving carbon neutrality], it is understood by everyone that that is our goal, and we have concrete measures in place, concrete steps to bring us to it," said Joy Romero, CNRL's vice-president for technology and innovation.
CNRL is the most heavily invested in carbon capture and storage technology (CCS). The company is the major partner in the Quest project, which was started and is still operated by Royal Dutch Shell PLC to capture CO2 emissions at a refinery in Scotford, Alta., near Edmonton. CNRL is also a majority owner of the Northwest Upgrader, which will capture CO2 for use in enhanced oil recovery projects.
At the upgraders, the companies use amine solutions to grab carbon dioxide produced during the process of making the hydrogen that helps transform thick bitumen into synthetic crude oil, which is easier to ship and refine. The CO2 is then chilled and liquefied before being sent by pipeline to storage locations.
In the case of Quest, the CO2 will be sequestered deep underground, where it will be monitored for leakage. The CO2 captured at the Northwest Upgrader will be used to stimulate the recovery of oil from aging Alberta fields and will be recovered for reuse rather than vented into the atmosphere. (CO2 is injected into older, conventional wells to maintain reservoir pressure, which allows more oil to be produced.)
CNRL has also recently started capturing CO2 at its Horizon oil sands plant near Fort McMurray, using it to displace the carbon dioxide it had been purchasing for use in wastewater treatment. Again, the CO2 will be recaptured in a closed-loop system.
With recent technological advances, the carbon-capture process is now cheaper than trucking the industrial gas from the south, Ms. Romero said. Carbon dioxide mixed with water produces a calcium carbonate that acts like a washing agent to remove clays, which settle to the bottom of tailings ponds. The approach allows more water to be recycled, reducing the size of the tailings ponds and cutting the use of natural gas in the operations.
Since 2012, the company has reduced emissions intensity at the 300,000-b/d Horizon mine by 37 per cent, while cutting operating costs to $20 a barrel from $34. It is touting these facts to institutional investors who make decisions partly on environmental, social and governance factors, known as ESG issues.
"Because our products are global commodities, they always have to be cost-competitive. So we're obviously trying to make sure we are cost-competitive inside of all this and that we have the preferable ESG barrel," Ms. Romero said. "So we hope those factors give us greater market share."
Suncor is also positioning itself as a long-term player in a global oil market whose future is highly uncertain. The company says it expects to add 360,000 b/d of in situ oil sands production before 2023 at a break-even level of less than US$50 for West Texas Intermediate. Last year, it had 940,000 b/d of production capacity.
In an interview at his Calgary office, Mr. Little said Suncor will continue to invest in technologies that reduce costs, increase revenues and cut GHG emissions, Last year, the company spent more than $600-million on research and development.
"The perfect scenario is one where you find something that has lower capital intensity, lower cost structure, higher revenues and reduced environmental footprint. That's utopia," he said. If there is increased operational risk involved in deploying a new technology, it has to earn a higher rate of return than business-as-usual operations, he added.
Carbon-pricing policies create incentives for Suncor to make an investment in GHG-reducing technology when the economics might otherwise not support it, Mr. Little said. "A carbon price is a very effective mechanism. One of the reasons we supported a carbon price is it allows market forces to help drive innovation and technology and allow us to come up with creative solutions."
Suncor is trying one such solution, paraffinic froth treatment, at its newest mine, Fort Hills.
Imperial also employs the process at its Kearl oil sands mine.
It employs hydrocarbon-based solvents to "wash" the bitumen after it has been dug out of the massive open-pit mine. The solvents interact with bitumen to help remove water, solids and the heaviest hydrocarbon molecules, known as asphaltenes. Paraffinic froth treatment requires less energy than traditional washing processes and yields a lighter-grade crude, which is easier to transport by pipeline and refine. GHG emissions per barrel at Fort Hills or Kearl are equivalent to those of conventional oil production, the companies say.
As a result, the producers do not need to upgrade the bitumen and can sell it as "modified bitumen," which commands higher prices than the product that has to be diluted in order to be shipped through pipelines but lower prices than the synthetic crude oil produced from upgraders.
At Imperial Oil, Dr. Trudell's lab is developing and testing the next big innovation in oil sands extraction: the use of solvents such as propane and butane to reduce the amount of steam needed to extract crude from bitumen deposits that are too deep to be mined. With the traditional method of steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD), steam generated by natural-gas boilers is injected into horizontal lengths that have been drilled into a formation in order to heat the tar-like bitumen. Less steam means burning less natural gas and fewer GHG emissions. Imperial Oil's planned Aspen project - which the company has delayed until pipeline capacity improves - will employ solvent-assisted technology that will lower emissions per barrel by 25 per cent, while also reducing operating costs.
Suncor is planning to use solvent technology for the in situ projects where the bitumen is too deep. It is also experimenting with a process it calls Solvent+, which includes the use of hydrocarbons such as propane and butane plus the application of heat generated by electromagnetic waves. That process could reduce GHG emissions by as much as 70 per cent because it would eliminate the need for steam and yield a lighter bitumen that would not need upgrading, said Gary Bunio, Suncor's general manager for oil sands strategic technology. However, it will not be ready for commercial use for several years at least.
The companies pose their longer-term challenge as a competitive one - they want to be the "preferred barrel" in a world where growth in oil demand is uncertain. However, environmental advocates argue the question should not be "Which source of crude is best?" but rather, "How can we quickly replace crude oil with cleaner energy?" Some 75 per cent to 80 per cent of GHG emissions associated with a barrel of crude occur when it is burned in a vehicle or other end user.
"When you look at this from a global perspective, our position is that we need to stop expanding production," said Keith Stewart, senior energy strategist with Greenpeace Canada.
"We need action on both the demand and the supply side."
Efforts to reduce consumption will be far more difficult if continued production growth drives down global oil prices, he noted. And Canada has been identified by the Paris-based International Energy Agency (IEA) as an important source of new supply as demand grows in the short term and production declines in aging oil fields around the world.
The future health of the Canadian oil sands depends, to a large degree, on how much oil the world will be consuming in 10 or 20 years. And projections of future demand range wildly, depending in part on the likelihood of success in the global effort to deal with climate change.
For example, Cenovus said in a report last month that it largely operates on the basis of a scenario laid out by the IEA that sees global crude demand growing until at least 2040.
However, that scenario - frequently cited by Canadian oil executives to defend bullish growth plans - is consistent with three degrees of global warming, an outcome that scientists say would have devastating consequences for human wellbeing as well as vulnerable plant and animal species.
The IEA has also published a sustainable development scenario that it says is consistent with the Paris agreement goal of limiting warming to well below two degrees, which would see oil demand peak near the end of the 2020s and decline by 30 per cent by 2040. Critics say the IEA is too bullish on future oil demand - a report last fall from the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned that two degrees of warming would be catastrophic and urged governments to limit warming to no more than 1.5 degrees, a goal that would require a rapid reduction in the use of fossil fuels, including oil, essentially phasing them out within 30 years.
In their sustainability reports, a number of the producers acknowledge that their operations would be constrained under a two-degree scenario, but none has yet provided a detailed analysis of the likely effects. Ottawa-based analyst Celine Bak argues that oil sands companies are vastly overstating their value in today's market because much of their oil reserves - which are used to establish asset value - will never be produced in a carbon-constrained world.
In climate-risk report released last month, Suncor laid out its view of the impact of climate change on its business operations and the value of its assets over time. It included one scenario that features the technological innovation and policy action needed to meet the two-degree target. Under that future,  new oil sands growth projects are challenged and unlikely to proceed," the company said, though it added that its existing assets would remain profitable to 2040.
In leading the backlash in Alberta against tougher climate policies and constrained production growth, Premier Jason Kenney has dismissed concern among global investors as "flavour of the day." But evidence is mounting that climate change is a present and growing crisis. Company executives - and governments in Canada - will face increasingly tough decisions on the wisdom of making long-term bets on oil.

Load-Date: August 24, 2019


End of Document




A CHANGE TO 'CLIMATE CHANGE'?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 11, 2019 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2019 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A12
Length: 127 words
Byline: Elizabeth Snell
Dateline: Guelph, Ont. 
Body


Re Have Canada's Voters Made A Green Shift? (Editorial, Sept. 9): Can some climate inaction be attributed to misleading terminology?
The looming devastation predicted by science seems obscured by such benign terms as "global warming," "greenhouse effect" and even "climate change." On the other hand, essential action uses frightening terms such as "war on warming" and "carbon tax." The message: Why trade mild effects for miserable sacrifice?
Reality is the reverse: The threat is horrifying, while effective action will create a much healthier society. We need terms to fit. Some examples might be "climate catastrophe" for the threat, and a "Green New Deal" including a "carbon price and rebate" for the action toward a healthier future.
Elizabeth Snell Guelph, Ont.

Load-Date: September 11, 2019


End of Document




Everybody talks about the climate, but ...; On the eve of Copenhagen, though most of us agree that climate change is real, there's no consensus on what to do about it
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
December 5, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOK REVIEW; ENVIRONMENT; Pg. F8
Length: 1466 words
Byline: KARIM BARDEESY
Body


OUR CHOICE A Plan to Solve the Climate Crisis 
 By Al Gore
 Rodale, 416 pages , $35
CLIMATE COVER-UP The Crusade to Deny Global Warming
 By James Hoggan with Richard Littlemore
 GreyStone, 250 pages, $22.95
WHY WE DISAGREE ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE Understanding Controversy, Inaction and Opportunity
 By Mike Hulme
 Cambridge University Press, 392 pages, $33.95
 *** 
 It is in human nature to look for shortcuts in dealing with big, looming problems. Part of the process involves creating a kind of emotional road map for the concepts that underlie these collective ailments. Some of those emotions move us to act. 
 And so we proceed with global warming. Climate change; Copenhagen; carbon: These have all become potent political ideas that have rallied many to the greatest cause of their lives. Others run for the barricades, to guard what they have. For some policy-makers and academicians, they conjure a Rubik's Cube or Fermat's Last Theorem, fascinating challenges involving numerical manipulation and a degree of finesse and intellectual dexterity, and which can ultimately be solved. 
 But for most Canadians, the ideas of climate change, Copenhagen and carbon are reminders of the distant worry we feel; things we should definitely, but have yet to, "do something" about, individually and collectively. A recent poll shows two-thirds of Canadians agreeing with the statement that "climate change is mankind's defining crisis, and demands a commensurate response." 
 What might be commensurate? Canadians know that their federal government is not doing enough. And yet the learning curve is so steep, the array of solutions no less bewildering. 
 For those who fret but have yet to act, new books promise an agenda for action without much pain, or promise to reveal the truth behind those who are blocking action. But ultimately, for all the attempts to solve the problem, climate change is still a political issue, involving deep disagreements that cut across continents, industries and generations, and necessary sacrifices few leaders are willing to articulate. The best resource for citizens might well be a book that demands greater engagement and asks, paradoxically, what climate change says about us. 
 Al Gore's agenda for action is mostly about clean sources of electricity, and lots of them. An Inconvenient Truth focused on the threat of global warming, and on the moral case for saving civilization from catastrophe. Our Choice offers his solutions. 
 Perhaps too many of them, for Gore's book is not quite as advertised; it is a catalogue, not a plan. The former U.S. vice-president has spoken to every scientist about every plausible renewable energy or carbon reduction technology, it seems, and he has put it all together with dozens of colour photos, fetching figures and diagrams, but in very clunky, college textbook-style prose. Each alternative energy source seems so exciting, and so proximate; the book is replete with invitations to "imagine" a promising future in which, say, geothermal energy (taking advantage of heat from within the earth) "could provide a significant fraction of U.S. primary energy needs." 
 Channelling the economic consensus, Gore makes the case for putting a price on carbon, to make new technologies more competitive. He also calls for greater investment to stop deforestation and soil degradation, which release large amounts of carbon dioxide. 
 On the other hand, there's almost no acknowledgment of the economic transformations needed to switch over to these new technologies. Indeed, the book leaves out the major existing energy sources, oil and coal, almost entirely, except to say how much they pollute. So strong is Gore's belief in innovation (even leading him to a discourse on brain function) that the politics is relatively absent. 
 By contrast, James Hoggan, chairman of the David Suzuki Foundation, makes politics, and the hunt for those who deny climate change, the primary task of Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming. Based on work done at the myth-debunking investigative website desmogblog.com, the book catalogues efforts by the political right, which denies that climate change is man-made, or that it is a sufficient threat to the planet to demand a response. 
 For Hoggan, the science and the debate are settled. Arguments for fighting global warming are given, but the focus is on a few people and organizations characterized as scoundrels. They play recurring roles: Oklahoma senator James Inhofe; U.S. think tank the Competitive Enterprise Institute; the opinion pages of the National Post and the Calgary Herald. 
 This is a small circle, exercising a disproportionate influence, Hoggan argues, and using a few reliable tricks. A perceived need in some media outlets to "balance" voices, even when one is making factually false arguments, allows skeptics to get their message out. 
 By and large, it is good journalism, but in 2009 are skeptics really that much of a threat to public opinion? Hoggan attempts to link the skeptics to Prime Minister Stephen Harper, but the connective strands are too few. Moreover, consider how flat a story that should have delighted the skeptics on all sides of the spectrum has fallen in Canada. Two weeks ago, e-mails leaked out from the Climate Research Unit at the University of East Anglia in Norwich, England, showing climate scientists slagging global-warming skeptics and appearing to hide or manipulate data. 
 The "scandal" emboldens the skeptics, but has not received much mainstream media coverage in Canada. This implies that denying climate change has become more a matter of ignorance and inaction than of "covering up." 
 Mike Hulme is a geographer at the Climate Research Unit and the author of some of the e-mails in question. In Why We Disagree About Climate Change: Understanding Controversy, Inaction and Opportunity, Hulme has chosen a deeper rumination on the problems of scientific truth. He shows how varied our emotional responses are to the seemingly distant climate problem, and how reasonable people can reasonably disagree on actions - even when they agree on the problem. 
 His book is less about partisan politics than Hoggan's. Instead, he steps back, taking a look at the idea of climate through historical and religious lenses, and through the lives and discoveries of people such as John Tyndall, the 19th-century British scientist who made the first experimental observations of the greenhouse effect, whereby gases in the atmosphere absorb and send back radiation. 
 The need to put climate in context gathers steam as Hulme describes how the different ways we think about science, religion, economic value and risk affect our views of climate change. For instance, how much value do we put on this generation versus future ones? What is our tolerance for risk? Disagreements along these lines mean we disagree about how quickly to act, and on what scale. 
 Hulme argues that rallying around a plan needn't involve an us-versus-them mentality. He points out that "people are rarely fully consistent in living out one particular set of values." Someone with a high risk tolerance could value economic growth less; meaning an appeal to fight climate change that acknowledges there will be an economic cost might be more effective. 
 Despite occasional academic jargon, the book is readable; rarely has the need to place a big idea in its social context been so practically important, or explained so clearly. Although Hulme presents more questions than answers, his open-minded approach can be used to help people who feel a nagging concern about climate change figure out the source of their concern, and define what to do about it more clearly. 
 It can also be used to help explore differences between those being asked for the biggest carbon-emission reductions - developed countries - and those developing economies that want to enjoy the same levels of growth, something that will be a key tension at Copenhagen. 
 Even so, for this reviewer's taste, Hulme's conclusion - that "the idea of climate change should be used to rethink and renegotiate our wider social goals about how and why we live on this planet" - falls short, in that it ignores the more immediate challenge to stop temperatures from rising. 
 That challenge will require commitments to sacrifice; hard-nosed negotiations; the relentless innovation prized by Al Gore and the need to separate truth from fiction that is evident in Climate Cover-Up. But, above all, it will take a deep grappling with the question of what we mean when we say we want to fight climate change, what values we conjure and what actions those values demand. It's a debate that we have been wary of having. Climate change is continuing regardless. 
Karim Bardeesy is on the editorial board of The Globe and Mail.

Load-Date: December 5, 2009


End of Document




CLIMATE CHANGE; Report details threat to people; IPCC study predicts melting ice in Rockies and Arctic to affect North American water supplies
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
March 31, 2014 Monday, Atlantic Edition


Copyright 2014 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 612 words
Byline: IVAN SEMENIUK
Body


 SCIENCE REPORTER
Violent conflicts and threats to the territorial integrity of some of the world's most vulnerable countries are among the more ominous risks posed by an ever-warming planet, according to the UN organization given the task of assessing the impacts of climate change.
In a report that for the first time includes human security in its review of how global warming will be experienced around the world, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) lists outcomes such as the displacement of populations, food shortages and economic shocks that are triggered or exacerbated by rising temperatures.
"If the world doesn't do anything about mitigating the emissions of greenhouse gases and the extent of climate change continues to increase, then the very social stability of human systems could be at stake," said Rajendra Pachauri, chairman of the IPCC, at a news briefing in Yokohama, Japan, where the report was released.
And while the impacts are poised to hit the world's poorest most severely, climate change is already affecting lives in every region of the globe, the report finds. "Wealth is not protection from vulnerability, but what you see is exposure and vulnerability unfolding in different ways in different societies," said Christopher Field, a professor of global ecology at Stanford University and co-chair of the working group that produced the report, which synthesizes the work of hundreds of researchers.
So far, among the most obvious impacts experienced by city dwellers in North America are meteorological, including a higher risk of dangerously extreme heat in summer, heavier precipitation and flooding events and a decreasing snowpack in winter months.
"We are very confident that our weather has begun to change and that adaptation to that change has started," said Paul Kovacs, executive director of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, based in Toronto and London, Ont. "Much of the adaptation has been reactive, particularly after extreme weather events."
Dr. Kovacs was one of the lead authors involved in crafting the North America chapter of the report and among the dozens of Canadian researchers who contributed to the document overall.
Larger consequences for North America are in store, including the loss of glaciers in the West, with implications for water supplies, threats to the livelihood of northern communities because of vanishing sea ice in the Arctic and impacts on coastal industries because of shifts in populations of economically important fish species.
The report, the second part of a larger IPCC assessment, presents the consequences and risks of a changing climate at a far greater level of detail and with more confidence than in the previous UN assessment, seven years ago.
That document drew harsh criticism when one of its predictions - that the Himalayan glaciers would vanish by 2035 - was found to be without scientific basis. The aftermath of the controversy led the IPCC to enlist a broader pool of authors and a more rigorous system of review for the latest assessment.
Despite these changes, the new report is certain to inflame critics of the IPCC who say the climate threat is overblown and that the economic costs of curtailing fossil-fuel use to reduce emissions is too great. Researchers looking at the long-term trends counter that the problem is more like that of a large ship on a collision course.
"It really comes down to risk management," said John Stone, an adjunct professor at Carleton University and a lead author of the chapter dealing with the polar regions. "The longer we put off action, the riskier it's going to become and the more expensive it's going to become."

Load-Date: April 29, 2014


End of Document




THE EXCHANGE; Storm warning; Intact CEO Charles Brindamour has been sounding the alarm on climate change for years-and he wants other leaders to finally listen up. /By Trevor Cole
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 31, 2020 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. P15
Length: 1906 words
Byline: Trevor Cole
Body


It makes sense that the business thinking most about climate change is the one that has to pay for it. Insurance companies that insure insurance companies-the huge "reinsurers" based in Europe-have been clanging the bell about the coming crisis for decades. Here in Canada, the company doing the most to sound the alarm is Intact, the country's largest provider of property and casualty insurance. About 15 years ago, Intact realized its entire business model was built on a fallacy: Its chief product was the protection of homes from the threat of fire when, almost overnight, the threat had changed.
Suddenly, 40% of all losses were caused by water, and it was only getting worse. By the end of the 2000s, thanks to the rise in natural disasters, the company was paying out between $1.10 and $1.15 for every dollar in premiums collected, and the peril had become existential. Led by its CEO, Charles Brindamour, Intact rebuilt its business model and funded a climate adaptation research centre at the University of Waterloo. Now Brindamour wants other Canadian leaders to turn with him to face the coming storm.
What is the essential message you're trying to communicate about climate change?
We need to act. We need to mitigate the impact of human influence, but more important, we need to protect ourselves against the consequences of change. And those consequences are here. We are on the front line.
Who are you trying to get through to, most of all?
The business community needs to think more proactively about the impact climate change has on their businesses and the opportunities that come with it.
It's not just all downside. It's a major defining trend of the 21st century. And we need to get our act together.
Do you sense that not enough is happening, that people are not acting?
That's the sense I'm getting.
For example, if you did a global survey of insurance companies, an industry that's on the front line, a third of them will see it as core business. A third of them will see it as an important social issue and would park it in what one would call "social responsibility." And a third of them would not see it as an issue.
Give me an example of something you want them to do.
Look, I'm not here to teach lessons to other business leaders. We've transformed our own business and are in a good position at this stage. I think Canada as a society and businesses more broadly have to make climate a more integral part of their strategies.
What do you want governments to do right now?
The debate, historically, has been about how we mitigate our footprint in terms of greenhouse gas emissions. Our perspective is that government needs to put more emphasis on protecting against the consequences. And frankly, governments are moving in that direction. There's far more emphasis on adaptation than there was seven, eight years
ago, and it's an important step.
Adaptation is tangible. It's very clear in people's minds.
You said you've transformed your business around this issue. How?
We had to change our product to be in sync with the perils that are now far more prominent across the country, and change our use of data and how we price for risk-we think pricing for risk is a core competency.
We had to change how we get Canadians back on track and restore them following a claim.
Then we invested heavily in prevention. Five years after this transformation, we have a sustainable, fast-growing product and we're continuing to invest, and we've turned home insurance into a sustainable and profitable product.
Have you pulled back from the coverage we generally expect from an insurer?
We have expanded coverage.
Broadly, for every dollar insured, there are three to four bucks uninsured. Where is that coming from? It's coming from people not being insured. It's coming from a product that is not necessarily connected with the perils that are more prevalent.
We thought, in the three dollars that are uninsured, maybe there's an opportunity to expand coverage. Following the Calgary flood in 2013 (1), we realized our product was just not properly built to deal with that, so-on the waterfront in particular-we expanded coverage. But we're pricing better for that risk, and we're making sure capital is not deployed in areas that are flooded every year, obviously.
Let's translate that. "Pricing better for that risk" means premiums are going up.
Premiums have gone up, yeah.
We've created optionality in the product as well, so people can choose the level of coverage they feel is more adequate for water.
And you're exiting some places you deem too risky.
The places where land-use planning has been an issue, where people have built on flood plains and you see a recurrence of flooding every three, five years-it's impossible to deploy capital in those areas. Land-use planning, in this new world, is hugely important. Building standards are hugely important.
You've made an issue of the need for Canada to improve its infrastructure. How are you analyzing that?
We looked at our own data, at climate data and then at the cost of floods in various cities. There has been a multidecade underinvestment in subterranean water management across the land. (2) We've been advising governments that bridging that infrastructure gap is really important for insurability. We've also pointed out that green infrastructure-marshes, wetlands and so on-are very powerful tools to reduce the damage associated with flooding. Our message to government was that green infrastructure should be critical and should be looked at, in the context of big infrastructure spending projects, as a valid category. There's more and more of that taking place. (3) In November, Merced Property and Casualty in California declared bankruptcy when it couldn't pay the insurance claims from the California Camp fire. (4) What's the potential for something like that happening here?
We have a very good prudential regulator who is in touch with the changes the world is going through. I think the property and casualty system is very sound and solid. A $10-billion event such as Fort McMurray, where a big portion of the city burns down-if you are a regional player where those events take place, concentration becomes an issue in ways, I think, people would not have thought about a decade ago. There's a risk there, indeed. But the big threat to the industry, still today, is earthquake.
A recent study said a major earthquake in Vancouver or Montreal could provoke the collapse of the entire Canadian insurance industry. Climate change makes a disaster on that scale more inevitable, right?
No. The quote in British Columbia you're referring to refers to a once-in-500-year event-an extreme.
But with climate change, it seems 500-year storms happen every few
years now. Doesn't it follow that a huge event is more likely?
Huge events are more likely, no doubt about it. The frequency and severity of rainstorms, for instance, have increased by a factor of four or five in the past 30 years, depending on where you look. But an earthquake in B.C. is an issue because the insured values are, in large part, on the fault line. The natural disasters we're seeing from heat, forest fire, flood and hail are more gradual in nature and of a different incidence than what a quake could do. I don't want to associate this with climate change, because people would say, "He's a fear-mongering kind of guy." And I'm not, of course.
Would you agree you're dealing with greater risk now than you were before?
We are dealing with greater risk than we were before. The coverage we're providing is more volatile. But you know, as risk takers, we're comfortable with volatility. We price for it, and we've organized our operations to deal with it. We're building capacity to deal with greater volatility in terms of the pattern of claims, and that's the business we're in.
Does more risk also mean an opportunity to make more money?
There's an opportunity to grow our business. And there's an opportunity to grow our profit base, that is true. There's an opportunity to grow because the pool of risk is growing meaningfully, and risk is our business. Climate is one of the pools of risk. Cyber is a big pool of risk. Inflation and liability is a massive pool of risk, as well.
We just acquired an organization called the Guarantee Co. of North America and Frank Cowan Co. One of its business units is government risk. It insures cities across Canada. One opportunity I see, that is directly related to our conversation, is to leverage our expertise in cities to see how we can de-risk, to a certain extent, cities that are also on the front lines of climate change.
Could you also force change by raising their premiums?
Pricing is a powerful behaviour changer, yes. But I think it's not just about raising premiums, because there's a point at which affordability becomes a problem.
The sophistication of pricing drives behavioural changes.
For one product in Ontario, for instance, we have over one trillion price points. That is a function of the work we're doing in data analytics. When you combine pricing sophistication .
with prevention activities, you do change behaviour.
Is there a risk inherent in climate change that we, as Canadians, generally haven't thought of, but that you are already preparing for?
The changes we've seen so far are irreversible, as far as we're concerned. In the next 50 years, these changes will be exacerbated. The west is to become 20% drier in the summer months, and central and eastern Canada is to become 20% wetter in the winter months.
It's a central thesis we've been operating under for six, seven years, and I think it is becoming more tangible to people. But it's not clear to me that people are aware that these changes are irreversible. We have a lot of work to do, and it's not going to get better.
What are the chances there will be a substantial number of Canadians, or Canadian businesses, that will be uninsurable in the next 10 or 20 years?
I don't want to be a prophet of doom here. I'm saying we need to adapt now, and I think if your position with your business is to create a growth opportunity out of the change, you should think about it now. But I don't want to call "uninsurability" at this stage.
Okay. But if I have a waterfront property, what's the likelihood that in 10 years I won't be able to either get insurance or afford it?
Hard to tell. The biggest danger on the coast is storm surge. The storms will be more powerful, and if water levels are higher, they will be more damaging.
Preventing for that as people build will be really important, 'cause if you're not prepared, it'll be hard to find capital and protection. But flooding is not just something you're exposed to on the coasts. Urban flooding is a problem across the board.
For insurance protection to be available going forward, additional investments in infrastructure are needed.
Can we end on a positive note?
It's all a positive note.
Well, is it?
I'm optimistic when I see governments putting more emphasis on adaptation. I'm optimistic when I see that a portion of the solution is green infrastructure. I think that as a nation, in the next decades, we'll be in a very good position to face these changes. But it's all hands on deck. And it shouldn't be seen as a constraint for businesses. It should be a core part of one's strategy.
Trevor Cole is the award-winning author of five books, including The Whisky King, a non-fiction account of Canada's most infamous mobster bootlegger.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




Canada can lead on climate change, if its leaders match their words with deeds; OPINION
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 30, 2020 Thursday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 793 words
Byline: MARY ROBINSON
Body


Lead
Chair of The Elders. She has served as the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, the UN special envoy for climate change and was the first woman to serve as president of Ireland.
We stand at a pivotal moment in history. As the world struggles to control the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigate what may be the worst recession in nearly a century, actions taken by countries to ease a climate emergency are at risk of being delayed, diluted or abandoned.
Texte/Text
The climate crisis has lost none of its urgency and the world remains dangerously off course in limiting global warming to no more than 1.5 C above preindustrial levels. Unless we drastically raise our ambitions in cutting carbon emissions, we can expect to see immense suffering, with vulnerable communities across the world bearing the brunt of increased water scarcity, plunges in crop yields and lifethreatening heat waves.
We need global leadership to address the climate crisis and build an economy beyond fossil fuels. Canada has an opportunity to step up and lead from the front.
As Justin Trudeau's government considers its financial response to COVID-19, I urge the Prime Minister to consider how the European Union has put its Green Deal at the heart of its recently agreed-upon 750-billion ($1.18-trillion) stimulus package, and to take seriously the voices from within Canadian businesses and civil society calling for an ambitious green recovery.
Canada enjoys a historic reputation for environmental leadership. But unfortunately, this credibility risks being undermined by a reluctance to meet words with ambitious decisionmaking.
Recent figures indicate that Canada commits more public financing to support fossil fuels than any Group of 20 country other than China. According to a report released in May by Oil Change International and Friends of the Earth U.S., Canada provides an average US$10.6-billion in support every year to oil and gas firms via Export Development Canada.
Despite Mr. Trudeau's public recognition of the climate emergency and determined rhetoric around the need for a green economy, this is a trend that has continued during the pandemic.
Since the emergence of COVID-19, Energy Policy Tracker estimates that Canada and its provinces have committed US$12-billion in support of fossil fuels, as opposed to just US$1.5-billion for clean-energy initiatives.
The Canadian government appears to have no plan to end or limit its support for fossil fuel companies. It has pledged only to phase out financial aid that meets its narrow definition of an "inefficient" fossil fuel subsidy.
In the decade since Canada and its Group of Seven partners made that commitment, much has changed. We now know that limiting warming to 1.5 C requires not only leaving most fossil fuel reserves in the ground, but also retiring the world's existing coal, oil and gas infrastructure on an accelerated timeline.
And yet, Canada's leaders continue to move in the opposite direction.
Such activity rightly raises concerns about the Canadian government's equivocation over the Vista mine expansion. The expansion would result in Vista becoming one of North America's largest coal mines, with much of the coal destined for Asia, and yet the federal government seems intent on sanctioning the extension without first completing a federal impact assessment.
How can one balance the plans to allow the Vista mine expansion with Canada's stated ambitions to help the world transition away from coal power?
Canada has played a leading role in the Powering Past Coal Alliance - an ambitious and worthy initiative to phase out the use of and investment in coal power at home and abroad. By allowing the Vista mine to ramp up production for more coal-fired power overseas, Mr. Trudeau risks severely damaging his country's credentials on climate change.
When I served as the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, I often looked to Canada to help advance the cause of global justice through its capacity for moral suasion.
This capacity was exemplified at the Paris Agreement negotiations, where Canada was instrumental in securing ambitious targets.
Canada must continue to be a credible force for ambitious climate action. I hope Canadians will join me in calling on their government to align its policies with its climate responsibilities and demonstrate the exemplary global leadership it has shown in the past.
We cannot afford to wait until we are through the looming economic crisis to ramp up our climate response. Canada has an opportunity to lead from the front and show that climate considerations can and should be put right at the heart of government decision-making in these unprecedented times.
Correction
Revision type: Modification
Revision date: Friday, July 31, 2020

Load-Date: July 31, 2020


End of Document




ADAPT OR DIE; Companies have been denying the economic impact of climate change for too long. Now big-name investors aren't giving them a choice
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 29, 2018 Friday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2018 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: ROB MAGAZINE; Pg. P38
Length: 2742 words
Byline: Eric Regul, Staff
Body


CLIMATE SCIENTISTS warned decades ago that stuffing the atmosphere with carbon was putting humanity on a collision course with nature. Fossil fuel companies and other carbon emitters did nothing.
In 1973, Munich Re rang the global-warming alarm bells.
You might have thought a warning from one of the world's biggest reinsurance companies-an apolitical observer not prone to hysteria-would encourage carbon-happy companies to start cleaning up their acts for the sake of the planet and the sustainability of their business models. Again, nothing.
Every year since 1995, the United Nations has held a summit on climate change, and every year, the science behind it became more credible, to the point where the deniers were relegated to Neanderthal status.
Some progress, but not much-global emissions continued to rise in spite of credible scenarios that life on a planet that is two degrees Celsius warmer, on average, than preindustrial levels would be somewhere between unpleasant and catastrophic. Those extra two degrees could, according to climate scientists, bring severe droughts and flooding, potentially destroying enough crops to create famines and uncontrollable human migration, widespread desertification, melting ice caps that will increase ocean levels and sink coastal cities, and excessively warm, acidified oceans.
But did these nightmare scenarios convince the biggest carbon emitters to put a tight lid on carbon output? Forget it.
But now, finally, it looks like the revolution is coming, and the trigger is not Munich Re or the UN or the thousands of scientists who think planet Earth is hurtling toward cosmic, deep-fried-Timbit status. The trigger is investors, from pension funds to millennials, who have social consciences; who are convinced companies pumping out greenhouse gases with abandon are setting themselves up for a fall that could destroy trillions of dollars in wealth; and who know that clean, or cleanish, energy can produce strong returns, so take that, ExxonMobil.
The investors' push is both encouraging and discouraging. Encouraging, because it's happening-and anything that moves the needle on the decarbonization dial is to be welcomed. Discouraging, because it's a pity the scientists weren't taken more seriously decades ago.
A milestone in the investor-led revolution came at the May 9 annual general meeting of Kinder Morgan, the U.S. energy infrastructure giant that wanted to build the $7.4-billion Trans Mountain pipeline from the Alberta oil sands to the company's terminal in Burnaby, British Columbia, where the guck would be shipped to Asia (in June, the Canadian government nationalized the stalled project). At the meeting, shareholders delivered a wake-up call to the company by passing two environmental resolutions, both of which the company had strenuously resisted.
The first simply demanded improvements in Kinder Morgan's environmental, social and governance (ESG) reporting, or sustainability reporting. The second was the biggie. The resolution requested that by 2019, Kinder Morgan produce a detailed report on the impact of its business on the internationally recognized goal of limiting the global temperature increase to two degrees Celsius (that was the main agreement of the 2015 Paris climate change accord, which was signed by most countries, including Canada). The so-called two-degree scenario (2DS) resolution also required Kinder Morgan to tell shareholders how it plans to transition to a low-carbon future.
Pat Miguel Tomaino, director of socially responsible investing at Boston's Zevin Asset Management, the resolution's lead filer, called the majority vote "historic," because shareholder proposals on any matter rarely win in the United States, and successful propositions related to the environment are virtually unheard of.
This year, share holders of Anadarko Petroleum, one of the biggest U.S. oil companies, also saw their 2DS resolution passed.
According to Ceres, an American advocacy group that pressures companies to run sustainable businesses, a dozen other oil-and-gas and electricity-generation companies, when threatened this year with shareholder resolutions, also committed to producing 2DS reports. "The exciting thing is that shareholders are now engaging companies [on climate change] instead of just avoiding them," says Tomaino.
The shareholders doing the engaging aren't just goody-goody investors like Zevin. Supporters of the Kinder Morgan resolutions included the Vermont state treasury; the California Public Employees' Retirement System, the largest U.S. pension fund; and the New York State Common Retirement Fund.
That's a lot of financial firepower pushing companies into getting serious about disclosing their potential environmental liabilities, climate change adaptation strategies and carbon reduction plans. If they don't make progress on their own, investors will take them by the ear and twist.
These investors feel that the compelling investment returns in the future will come from companies with low-carbon strategies. The fact that these strategies are the ethically right course for a planet under severe stress is a nice bonus.
Which brings us to Michael Sabia, the all-powerful boss of the all-powerful Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec, one of the world's top 20 pension funds, with about $300 billion in assets under management. He has emerged as one of the driving forces-perhaps the driving force-behind persuading companies to take climate change seriously.
He's not just bellowing about it, like a green-tinged evangelist; he has, in effect, made it the law. He has told his portfolio managers that the carbon footprints of their collective investments have to fall by 25% by 2025, and he has geared part of their pay to that goal. At the same time, he is insisting that the value of the Caisse's portfolio of low- and zero-carbon assets will rise by 50%, the equivalent of $8 billion, by 2020.
Corporate Canada is paying attention. "Someone had to draw a line in the sand, and it was him. Good for Michael," says Nancy Lockhart, an independent director of Toronto's Barrick Gold, the world's biggest gold producer, and the chair of its corporate responsibility committee.
"I applaud Michael for stating [the Caisse's] goal."
Why did Sabia pick such ambitious targets? To be sure, he's no nature freak chomping away on bark sandwiches. This is a man whose career lives or dies by investment returns. But the Caisse, like many other fund managers, realizes that the transition to a low-carbon economy-a transition vital to the health of the planet-is inevitable, accelerating and does not necessarily mean sacrificing investment returns. "I don't buy the idea that there's a trade-off between low-carbon assets and financial performance," Sabia says. "Our low-carbon assets are very high performers."
Low-carbon assets can often outperform the market, thanks in part to great leaps in technology and the plummeting prices of that technology (high-efficiency rooftop solar panels and offshore wind farms, to name but two). Solar panels are approaching giveaway prices. In the mid-1970s, the price of a panel, per watt, was more than $100 (U.S.). By last year, it had dropped to 37 cents, according to estimates by Bloomberg and the Earth Policy Institute. No wonder the chart for solar installations has gone vertical or that half of all global growth in electricity generation in 2017 came from renewables. The price is right.
The Caisse is keen on low-carbon, bigbuck infrastructure projects, like Greater Montreal's Réseau express métropolitain, a rapid transit system for which the Caisse is providing almost $3 billion in funding.
To offset the carbon generated by its construction phase, some 250,000 trees will be planted. The Caisse expects to produce annual returns of 8% to 9% on the investment, and similar investments in lowcarbon transportation systems are being considered in other countries, such as the U.S. and New Zealand. "There are so many opportunities to invest in high-return, lowcarbon assets," Sabia says.
Low-carbon investments still represent only a small part of the Caisse's overall portfolio. Some of the more prominent green and greenish holdings the Caisse says "contribute to the energy transition" include a 25% stake in the London Array, the world's largest offshore wind farm, located in the Thames estuary; a 30% stake in Eurostar, the high-speed train that connects Britain to France and Belgium; and 52% of Invenergy, the American wind, solar, natural gas and electricity-storage company that has several projects in Canada.
But he knows reducing the carbon footprint of the Caisse's portfolios can't be done by ramping up low-carbon investments alone. Even Sabia admits it's inevitable that some names will be ditched, even if they produce decent returns.
It must be dawning on Canada's biggest companies that high performance will no longer guarantee them a spot in the Caisse's portfolios, and if it hasn't, they're
in for a shock. They should also know other funds will eventually mimic the Caisse's strategy. If that's not an incentive to squeeze some carbon out of the business, nothing is-short of regulations and taxes designed to reduce output, and they're coming too.
INVESTMENTS GUIDED BY ESG principles are nothing new. According to an ESG history compiled by Britain's Hermes Investment Management, the Quakers Friends Fiduciary in 1898 adopted a policy of avoiding investments in weapons, alcohol and tobacco-a sin-free portfolio. The idea gained momentum and, after the Depression, investors everywhere became aware of socially responsible investing (SRI) and its governancefocused offshoot, responsible investing, as corporate fraud became distressingly commonplace.
SRI played a role in the anti-war protests of the 1960s, with protesters urging university endowment funds to exclude weapons makers from their portfolios-and some did. In 1971, Pax World Funds launched the first socially responsible mutual fund. The standout campaign of the early 1990s was the investment boycott of South Africa.
In the United States alone, funds with assets of more than $625 billion (U.S.) had been screened to exclude South African investments, piling pressure on the regime to end apartheid. In Britain, the Pensions Act of 1995 required trustees to disclose their policies on social, ethical and environmental matters.
In the first decade of this century, SRI evolved into ESG. The key event was the UN's launch, in 2006, of the Principles for Responsible Investment. Its six tenets, including incorporating ESG principles in investment analysis and decision making, are voluntary but have attracted signatories representing some $70 trillion (U.S.) in investments.
One crucial ESG event in this decade saw Canada's own Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England and chairman of the Financial Stability Board, and Michael Bloomberg launch the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD). It urged companies to report their climate change risks to both help them make the transition to a low-carbon economy and allow investors to put a price on their investments' potential liabilities, from flood risk to stranded assets, as oncein-a-century climate-related disasters turn into once-in-a-decade catastrophes.
At last count, over 250 companies and pension funds, with a combined market value of more than $6 trillion (U.S.), had supported the TCFD. The first Canadian company to sign up was Barrick. Other Canadian signatories include Royal Bank, British Columbia Investment Management, Telus and Suncor. Yes, Suncor, the biggest Canadian player in our dirtiest industry, the oil sands.
Andrew Parry, head of sustainable investing at Hermes, which has also signed up to the TCFD, says investing on ESG principles is becoming popular partly because of the changing nature of investors themselves.
Millennials are not like their parents or grandparents, who mostly wanted fat returns and damn the planet.
"Millennials want to see their values reflected in their portfolio managers," he says. "We have to see our role more broadly than just producing financial returns. We are embedded in society."
His point is that carbon output, or lack thereof, is now integrated into the day-to-day thinking of the new generation of investors. Hermes itself is so concerned about climate change risk that it uses satellite imaging data
to determine, say, whether a real estate development in southeast Asia is vulnerable to extreme weather. Mention "climate change," he says, and investors go into a coma. But mention "climate volatility," and they pay attention.
INVESTORS HAVE TWO main strategies to encourage companies to take the black out and put the green in. The first is persuasion. Investment managers will make it known that they want the companies they invest in to minimize their climate change risks and make plans to move to low-carbon operations. Shareholder resolutions, which are used far more frequently in the United States than in Canada, are part of this approach-persuasion with a stick. The second strategy is divestment, which has its pros and cons. Kevin Thomas, executive director of Toronto's Shareholder Association for Research and Education, known as SHARE, is not a big fan of divestment, noting that if a fund sells its shares in an excessively carbon-intensive company, another investor will just pick them up. "Divestment is withdrawing from the battle," he says. "Better to be in the battle."
So what are companies doing to minimize the chances of falling out of investors' good books? Senior executives and directors at top companies will have to respond to increasingly activist investors.
They won't buy the line that certain businesses are insulated from the ill effects of climate change, an argument still trotted out by a few obstinate CEOs, especially of the oil-and-gas variety. "We are under a bit of pressure," says Steve Williams, Suncor's CEO. "We support disclosure and transparency, and we have been taking action on climate change for decades." Barrick's Lockhart has a similar message.
She says Barrick's sustainability strategy is not in direct response to shareholder pressure; instead, "our strategy is to get ahead of any shareholder pressure."
Barrick's industry-gouging huge holes in the earth to remove gold-is grubby and destructive, and requires enormous amounts of water, electricity and diesel fuel, whose extravagant use can exacerbate climate change. Barrick no longer needs to be reminded of those inconvenient facts.
Its stated goal is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30% over 2016's level by 2030. To get there, some of Barrick's diesel trucks will be converted to electric power, and the company is trying to boost its supply of electricity from renewable sources.
In the Dominican Republic, Barrick and partner Goldcorp are spending about $7.5 million (U.S.) to covert an oil-burning plant to natural gas. The plant will cut emissions by 260,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent a year and save $54 (U.S.) per ounce in operating costs over the life of the mine-evidence that cleaner is not always costlier.
Suncor is taking climate change seriously. It has to, since in Europe, "Suncor" and "tar sands" are synonymous. Suncor is relying on technology to bring down its carbon intensity-the carbon output per barrel produced. The intensity of Suncor's underground oil sands operations and related base plants has dropped by 45% since 1990; the goal is to knock it down by another 30% by 2030. Here's the catch: Lower carbon intensity does not mean lower overall carbon output. As new pipelines allow Suncor's production to keep climbing, total emissions will climb with it. Between 2015 and 2020, they are expected to rise by a quarter.
What might a fund manager charged with scaling back the carbon intensity of their portfolio do when they see Suncor simultaneously becoming cleaner (lower carbon intensity) and dirtier (higher carbon output)? Williams says, "I see a sensible and rational conversation with them. If all these guys do is choose to exit, that does not solve the problem at all." Indeed. But the ever-warmer world is changing investment strategies.
Suncor, and companies like it, might find themselves turfed from fund portfolios, potentially making them investment pariahs, no matter how good their returns. A carbon cleanup driven by investors, not hindered by them, is in progress, and that's encouraging. Money talks.

Load-Date: June 29, 2018


End of Document




HELL AND HIGH WATER; In an era of climate change, floods like the one in Houston this week are the rule, not the exception, writes Ian Brown. But as the tragedies mount, why do we do so little to prepare for the rising water?
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
September 2, 2017 Saturday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2017 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS; Pg. F1
Length: 4919 words
Byline: Ian rown, Staff
Body


The most shocking elements of Hurricane Harvey in Houston were how intensely it rained, how fast the flood happened, and how relentlessly unstoppable it was. The weather seemed to live by rules of its own. The Class 4 hurricane was "downgraded" to a tropical storm Monday and to a tropical depression midweek, but the 6.6 million residents of Houston upgraded their grasp of the gravity of the disaster with every ensuing day.
Water levels in parts of the fourth-largest city in the United States rose six inches an hour.
The Brazos River surged 30 feet, and the water was coming for Louisiana too: the deluge was aggressive, relented, then got worse again, like a bitter nighttime argument. Submerged, Houston's cityscape of turnpikes and malls and parking lots is smoothed out and featureless, almost prehistoric: You half expect a brontosaurus to lumber into view, munching treetops.
Highway off-ramps have become rescue boat launches.
As many as 39 people are thought to have died at the time of writing, a miraculously small number (1,200 have died and millions are homeless due to current floods in India, Bangladesh and Nepal), except that rescue crews have yet to sweep the vast majority of the buildings under water, and no one knows what they will find. More than 32,000 people have taken refuge in emergency shelters; 450,000 will need federal aid to rebuild and recover. The U.S.
Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) promised Houston two million meals and two million litres of water, a number that instantly seemed as inadequate as it was huge.
Rainfall from the storm was expected to top 1.3 metres - a year's worth of rain in a week, and the biggest downpour in American history, prompting various officials to classify the disaster as "an 800-year flood event" and "a 1,200-year flood event" - allegedly 57 trillion litres of rain, more than twice the volume of Hurricane Katrina, roughly two-thirds of the Red Sea, or - this is America, after all - "enough water to fill all the NFL and Division 1 college football stadiums more than 100 times over," as one sprightly television network put it. The spectacle was awash in big numbers. More than 3,500 people had been rescued by midweek, plucked from roofs and cars where some had been living for two days. Property losses will be in the double-digit billions, at best.
As the rain fell and the water rose, the economic and social future of an entire state warped and split. Somewhere between 11 and 30 per cent of Texas's vaunted refining capacity is literally underwater; gas futures hit a two-year high (there are always winners in disasters), but recovery may take a decade. The endlessly looping pictures on television revealed how quickly fates are decided, and how randomly, in a climatic crisis: a gaggle of elderly women in the living room of a retirement home, knitting as they sat in their wheelchairs and walkers up to their waists in water, were rescued; in one haunting case, a couple in their eighties and their four great-grandchildren found in a van in Greens Bayou, were not. (Some 66 per cent of U.S. flood deaths in 2014 occurred in cars.)
Blame for the flood was quickly aimed at climate change and Houston's cavalier enthusiasm for development, for paving over spongy wetlands and absorbent floodplains and then building houses on them. The most obvious fear was the terror on the surface: Where is all the water going to go, if Galveston Bay is already swollen and refusing it?
But under that question ran another prospect, unstated but more terrifying: that Houston is just a dress rehearsal for what's to come when the sea level rises, as it is guaranteed to in the next 85 years. (Nearly two metres is the optimistic scientific guess.) Imagine the chaos when Houston and Miami and New York and Boston and Toronto and Vancouver are underwater at the same time.
No wonder human societies have always been afraid of floods - deep in our bones, in our collective unconscious, throughout human history, and to this day. We know floods are coming, just as Houston did, and yet, like Houston, we cast the prospect from our minds and fail to prepare. There are more floods, and more severe floods, today, thanks to global warming, than ever before, and yet our behaviour toward them in the 21st century is just as irrational as that of our pagan ancestors, who considered them a punishment from a vengeful God. As much as we fear floods, another corner of the human psyche refuses to think about them. From an evolutionary point of view, we seem incapable of planning ahead. Why is that? Do we prefer the short term profit of the status quo? Or have we now scared ourselves too much to make a move?
We ought to fear floods, especially now. This summer, in addition to Manitoba, British Columbia, Toronto, Montreal and other places in Canada, floods were wreaking catastrophe in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Taiwan, Uruguay, Brazil, Arkansas, northern India, Honduras, the Philippines, northeast Scotland, Serbia and (just this week) Mumbai, to name just a few very wet spots. Between 1995 and 2015, 3,062 floods killed roughly 175,000 people, displaced 2.3 billion others (nearly a third of the global population), and accounted for 56 per cent of all weatherrelated disasters. (Famine, in second place, affected only 1.1 billion people. Fires - remember how much media space the infernos in B.C. took up this summer? - accounted for 4 per cent of weather-related crises.)
These floods are getting worse, fast. In South America alone, between 1995 and 2004, 560,000 people were affected. Between 2005 and 2014, the number rose to 2.2 million, a fourfold increase. Flash floods like the one that inundated Houston this week (the National Weather Service defines a flash flood as one that happens in under six hours) are more and more common, and deadlier. Roughly 2,100 people died in such inundations in Pakistan in 2010; by 2013, in India, the number was 6,500. By 2030, global flood losses will be worth $300-billion a year. Food supplies are already suffering. In Europe and Britain, where the surviving flood plains are no longer adequate, property losses are expected to quintuple by 2050.
The central culprit seems to be climate change. (And that's despite what human boxcar Ann Coulter tweeted midweek about Houston: "I don't believe Hurricane Harvey is God's punishment for Houston electing a lesbian mayor. But that is more credible than 'climate change.'" She did not mention the fact that Houston's current mayor, Sylvester Turner, is an AfricanAmerican man, but given Ms. Coulter's political leanings, that might not have changed her tweet.) A recent study in the American Meteorological Society's Journal of Hydrometeorology revealed that between 1996 and 2014, extreme rainfall in the U.S. Northeast was 53 per cent higher than it had been in the previous 94 years. Similar patterns have occurred in the Midwest and on the Great Plains, among other places.
No scientist has openly declared that the Houston deluge was specifically caused by climate change. But a strong hypothesis is already emerging.
Harvey was the worst rainstorm in American history. As with an increasing number of storms, its rain also fell in a shorter period of time, a phenomenon linked to the warming atmosphere.
Oceans are heating up; the Gulf of Mexico is at least one degree Centigrade warmer now than it has been, historically. The steamier air and water supplied the overhead storm with a bottomless well of rain.
And why was Harvey stalled in one place, instead of blowing through in a few days, as happened with storms of yore? Scientists believe melting Arctic ice desalinates the ocean, which in turn confuses and redirects both ocean currents and the jet stream, resulting in more jammed and stalled weather fronts. Harvey was trapped between two such inert atmospheric bollards all week.
Meanwhile, in June, at the other end of the earth, a long-building crack in the Larsen C ice shelf in Antarctica grew more than 16 kilometres in six days; in July, the cracked portion broke off completely, calving an iceberg the size of Delaware.
More than 60 per cent of Earth's freshwater is frozen in Antarctica's ice sheets. Imagine that thaw, and fear it.
We come by our terror of floods honestly. The water - maternal and evolutionary, baby! - we all slithered out of is the medium we most dread, the original pool that threatens to suck us down and back again, to devolve us.
Flood myths have terrified human cultures forever.
Some of the myths are fairly eccentric. Otto Rank, a pal and later sworn enemy of Sigmund Freud's, believed the human preoccupation with flooding stemmed from the suppressed desire to pee in dreams. In the creation myths of the Chukchee, who live near the Bering Sea in easternmost Siberia, male ravens compete with females to create the world. Females give birth to fledgling ravens, whereas the envious males have to be content with creating the land out of feces and the rivers and seas from urine. (There's an entire school of scholarship devoted to the role of urine in flood myths.) The Sumerian epic of Gilgamesh, the earliest known work of literature (its last major edit took place in 1200 BC), revolves around a flood so severe that even the gods get nervous.
Nor is our preoccupation with flooding just an ancient thing.
The Mississippi River's Great Flood of 1927 - also caused by wetland destruction, as in Houston 90 years later, because we never seem to learn - submerged 77,700 square kilometres across seven states under nine metres of water, rendered nearly a million people homeless, and single-handedly changed the cultural history of the United States. The official death toll at the time, according to a recent essay about the Great Flood in the Times Literary Supplement, was 246; that didn't include the corpses of African-Americans, which brought the figure over 1,000. The deluge inspired writers from William Faulkner (As I Lay Dying, an eco-disaster novel) to W. E. B. Du Bois, and musicians from Bessie Smith to Led Zeppelin. The 1927 flood is also credited with transforming American politics: it convinced disillusioned black Americans, who had been supporters of Lincoln and therefore Republican, to switch to the Democrats. It also spurred their mass migration to Chicago from the South.
Ken Kesey placed the ever-stubborn Stamper family's house on a water-threatened peninsula in Sometimes a Great Notion, and Bob Dylan built an entire pier of his career on songs about floods and levees, as a metaphor for both racism and love, most recently after Hurricane Katrina flooded New Orleans and killed 1,833 people 12 years ago this very week. "If it keep on rainin', the levee gonna break," Dylan sings on Modern Times. "Everybody saying this is a day only the Lord could make."
Which brings us to Noah. The Biblical account of the Flood in Genesis 6-9 kicks off when rowdy men, God's creation, take their own daughters for wives, thereby breaking the incest taboo. God concludes man's heart is "only evil, continually," and decides "to destroy all flesh" via a world-wide flood. The only exception is 600-year-old Noah, his wife, his three sons and their wives, and one pair of every living species on earth. Why God has to wipe out the entire world to enact his revenge on some men is never clear, but the Old Testament never does things by half: If one man is guilty, all men are guilty.
Noah packs everyone and everything into a 150-metre-long, 23-metre-wide and 14-metre-high ark he has built with his own hands from gopher wood, which is Bible talk for cypress. (Ark Encounter, a contemporary theme park that features a full-size, hand-built Noah's Ark that is the sister attraction of the Creation Museum in Williamston, Kentucky, charges $40 a head for adults and $28 for children.
Then again, it's the largest timber structure in the world.) You could fit about four arks into one of the largest container freighters on the ocean today.
Once the chosen are safely inside, God opens "the windows of heaven" and raises the water level of the world by about 15 metres for 150 days. The tops of the mountains disappear, and everything not in the ark drowns and dies. The water finally subsides 10 months after it rose; only then does God promise never to do such a dastardly thing again. What a jackass! And yet Noah's first act, unctuous wiener that he is? He makes a sacrifice to God for saving his family from the Deluge.
God in turn gives Noah and his offspring dominion over the land and animals. That hasn't worked out so well.
The idea that environmental catastrophes are the work of a vengeful God (or gods) has dominated human culture for more than 10,000 years. No wonder so many people think floods are out of our control, that there's very little we can do to prevent or control them. That, for instance, is a publicly stated opinion of both Mike Talbot, the former director of the Harris County Flood Control District
that oversees Houston, and Russ Poppe, his successor, according to an extensive (and excellent) study of Houston's flood history published last year by the Texas Tribune and ProPublica. And it's an idea that lingers, on one form or another, even among scientists.
Once, in a coffee shop in Calgary, I met David Keith, the Canadian-born Harvard professor who has been one of the world's leading investigators of the possibility of geo-engineering a reflective chemical layer in the atmosphere, to instantly lower global warming by a degree or two. "Will it work?" I asked the professor. "Well," he said, pursing his lips, "we'd want to make sure of that. Because if we get it wrong, we could bring the ice caps down to the temperate zone very quickly." Prof. Keith has suggested we might not want to bio-engineer our way out of climate catastrophes. But the lurking warning is the same, for scientists and believers alike: this is tricky stuff, and whatever we do, our fate may be out of our hands. You can say that's just a way of supporting the status quo, and you would be right; but the source of our passivity runs deeper, into our frightened marrow.
The water in Houston has started to ebb, but the fear a flood spawns lasts an especially long time.
Wendy Best has been a lawyer in Calgary for more than 30 years. Very little intimidates her.
For decades she has belonged to a brainy book club - judges, lawyers, psychiatrists. Until "the flood of the century" swamped Calgary four years ago this past June, she inhaled two novels a week. It was her lifelong habit, maybe her most private pleasure.
But ever since Calgary's Elbow River rose two metres above the main floor of her house and forced her out of her home for 10 months, she hasn't been able to read a book. Four years. Magazines, yes; newspapers, sure.
Anything short that doesn't require the surrender of her immediate attention, she can manage. But she hasn't been able to read a work of fiction since the water rushed up fast and anything but imaginary from the river and then the yard and then the basement. The Calgary flood of 2005 had been called the flood of a century; no one expected the water to rise again in 2013, three times as high. She figures she has PTSD, widely acknowledged as the most common post-flood ailment. She traces it back to the first seven weeks after the flood, "when we were just kicking around, staying at a hotel, staying with friends, staying with my in-laws. We were unsettled for a very long period of time. " For nearly two months she carried her daily belongings in a Walmart bag.
"All of a sudden, I couldn't concentrate."
She still can't. Because the Alberta government and the insurance industry still haven't fully resolved who should pay for what, her street still isn't rebuilt, "so you're constantly reminded of it." She started her first book in four years - Ann Patchett's This Is the Story of a Happy Marriage - this June. But June is when the river swells; June is permanently stamped on her memory as the month of catastrophe. She managed three pages in four days. Her house, too, is emptier than it used to be. "It gives you a new perspective on all the crap you accumulate, that we were saving for some purpose...We're going crap-free." That way they can't lose it again. An insurance payout of $250,000 covered half the cost of her post-flood renovation.
And now that it's over? "We just sit on the back deck, and we watch the water, and ask, 'How high is it?' That's our little weirdo thing now, instead of looking at the birds."
Even mild floods change the way people understand a landscape they've relied on. Last spring the water in Lake Ontario, fed by another stalled storm system, rose a foot and swamped 60 per cent of the Toronto Islands, the heavily populated sandbars sprinkled off the shore of downtown Toronto.
Tubular-metal lifeguard chairs were stranded metres from the shore, utterly useless. A baseball diamond was a pond. The islands were officially closed to visitors until August, and Island kids had to attend school on dry mainland. Islanders hefted 40,000 sandbags, the Sisyphean symbol of floods everywhere. A visitor who paddled out to the islands in a kayak heard an incessant nag, industrial pumps flushing floodwater back into the lake. Speaking of flushing: no one wanted to think about what was in the water. But the bird life! Astonishing. The swans and ducks didn't even move out of the way: Humans, reduced to floating, were suddenly guests in their world. It felt like some kind of revenge.
Joanna Kidd has lived on the islands more or less steadily for 51 years. She spent her summer sandbagging the Queen City Yacht Club, a hundred-year-old building. "And then the water just rose and rose and rose. It kind of wasn't an issue, and then it was. It was just relentless." The water came over the wharfs, over the boardwalk, but also up through the sand, like the devil. Her home was fine.
"It's not in peoples' homes," she told me one afternoon. "But it's under peoples' homes." She worried steadily: Would the sandbags hold, would the beaches wash away? "The thing about water is, it will do what it will do. It'll go everywhere." She has been a sailor all her life, but the flood water looked different. "It might be a trick of the light, but it looks almost viscous. Really strange." But then, everything's strange when it's underwater and isn't supposed to be: The rules of predictable reality are altered. "Just the fact that roads disappear, totally disappear," Joanna said. "The park's disappeared." Pause. "Driving along and seeing carp right there beside you on the road" - twofoot-long carp at that. "A plague of carp." She too is a voracious reader, and she too hasn't been able to read a book since the water rose in May. "I think the stress makes you so tired, you don't have the energy to read.
Water is such a powerful force."
It's so powerful, it may be permanently altering the place she has loved as a home for half a century. "I feel like I'm watching the islands turn into a swamp."
What if these changes are permanent? That's another fear.
Toronto's city council has been a laggard on the issue of urban drainage, just as Houston's has.
Every flood story is different but they all have these same elements: the deluge, the surprise despite the warnings, the heroics and the tragedies, the resignation, the post-traumatic anxiety. PTSD, depression and pathological watchfulness are the most common symptoms in the aftermath, in that order.
Women are more susceptible than men, children and adolescents most of all. Having to vacate a home, having it happen more than once, suffering financial loss, all make it worse. Anywhere from five to 60 per cent of flood victims are affected. Psychologists identify various coping strategies: rational problem solving, emotional coping, avoidance coping. None of these work very well. Better to try detached coping - getting down and doing what you have to do as soon as you can and as calmly as possible, without taking it personally.
Sheer endurance is your best bet.
Experts consider the entire constellation of problems to be "a growing public health concern." Houston will boil up a cauldron of trauma.
The other thing everyone remembers, of course, the other common element in every flood story, in all our personal Gilgameshes, is the way people band together to help each other, creating what the writer Rebecca Solnit optimistically refers to as "a paradise built in hell." The enormous hidden capabilities of large cities surface, as do otherwise dormant Samaritan impulses. Wendy Best remembers waiters from nearby restaurants carrying free trays of food, sliders, soup, you name it, into her drenched and stricken Calgary neighbourhood. "Who wants key-lime pie?" the waiters shouted. A surprising number of flood victims did.
This is why footage and stories of people stranded on and then rescued off their cars and roofs and chimneys in Houston were so compelling, and also essential to our modern flood narrative.
Those people stayed behind, for a multitude of reasons, good and bad; they tried to resist the rising tide, and became stranded.
We're terrified by the prospect of being left behind by nature - of drowning, alone - and the images of the rescues, repeated again and again in the media, help sustain our irrational fantasy that we can defeat the forces of nature (forces we pissed off by abetting climate change). Which is not to say that the rescues aren't worth honouring, or that the sight of people helping one another in a crisis isn't inspiring.
The day after the peak of the flood in Calgary three years ago, a Sunday, an unprecedented 300 people turned up for service at Hillhurst United Church in downtown Calgary. The Reverend John Pentland was not surprised. In a flood, he says, "you do get a sense that we are a part of Creation, not distant from or above it. And that's really humbling." There might be a sopping lesson there: The quicker we admit how fragile we are, the faster we can drop our pretense of control.
A flood is a catastrophe but also a lens, an opportunity to acknowledge that disaster is upon us. But acknowledging the truth isn't automatic. A lot of flooding is preventable, with sufficient and timely infrastructure, but the need for thoughtful development gets lost in a city's lust for more and faster money. Then the flood comes, and we see human life stripped to its essence, survival and loss and grace and courage. It's all very moving, even Biblical, for a while. Then the water evaporates and we forget and get greedy again. It's not a difficult pattern to discern.
Houston is the perfect example of our willful blindness. Flooding is to Houston's history what the fur trade was to Canada, its reason for being: The city came into its own after the Great Hurricane of 1900 wiped out thriving Galveston and put inland (and presumably safer) Houston on the map.
But Houston cares more consistently about development than it does about flooding and its victims. Between 1992 and 2010, 30 per cent of the vast metropolis's water-absorbing pastureland was lost to development, while paved areas increased by 25 per cent. Water doesn't drain through concrete. The location of the concrete is even more of an issue. In June, 2001, Tropical Storm Allison poured 40 inches of water onto Houston, at a cost of more than 40 lives and $5-billion in damages. About half the buildings that flooded in 2001 were outside the city's official 100-year floodplain (the flood zone that, historically, had only a 1-per-cent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year). In other words, the official floodplain was already out of date in an era of rapid climate change. But since 2010, nine years after the havoc of Allison, thousands more residential and commercial buildings have been constructed in the good old 100-year flood zone! Harvey is the fourth time in eight years Houstonian homes have been badly flooded. In Houston, they refer to this as "the overflow problem." People are dying because of the overflow problem.
That was the kind of shortsighted development Barack Obama sought to prevent when he signed an executive order in 2015 "establishing a federal flood risk management standard" in new public infrastructure. The new standard was designed to protect against more frequent floods due to climate change as well as a sea level rise of anywhere between eight inches and six feet by the year 2100.
Donald Trump revoked the Obama order just over two weeks ago - 10 (ten) days before Hurricane Harvey burst from the skies. Not many people noticed Mr. Trump's repeal because the press conference at which he announced it was the same one where he said white supremacists could be fine people. And he certainly didn't mention his revocation of the Obama flood protection when he popped down to Corpus Christi this week to "witness" the periphery of the Houston flood, when he said of the recovery, "we want to do it better than ever before."
This is what happens when decisions come down to money first and everything else last, when a culture prefers the glory of survival - o brave countrymen! - and the grit of recovery - this is what America's all about! - to the quiet, expensive, hard work of prevention. A few Christmases ago I took an evening boat cruise down Florida's Intracoastal Waterway near Palm Beach, the seaside winter home of billionaires and Donald Trump, among others. The cruise director kept pointing out $30-million homes whose front doors were now only a foot above the lapping water. These days the rising sea floods nearby Fort Lauderdale about twice a month, and the city recently spent $100-million on seawall reinforcements. Billionaires keep buying the watery mansions regardless: They are certain they can defeat the water, buy their way dry. Theirs was the (polar) opposite of the approach to climate I had encountered a few months earlier on a mountainside on northern Baffin Island in a 50-kilometre-an-hour wind in minus-30-degree weather. It was so cold an instant's exposure scalded your skin. I asked some locals how the Inuit had survived for 10,000 years in such brutal cold and wind and darkness. "We stay inside when it's cold and dark," someone replied, as if I had asked the stupidest question in the world. The Inuit - who confront extreme climate conditions every day - may or may not call what they face "climate change." But whatever they face, they see it as something to acknowledge, accommodate and work around.
In a 2008 paper entitled "The Conquering of Climate: discourses of fear and their resolution," a British climatologist named Mike Hulme pointed out that humans have always reacted to cataclysmic climate events through the lens of their predominant culture. Before the scientific revolution, Europeans understood bad weather in only one way, as God's punishment for our sins. A year after the Great Storm of 1703 killed at least 8,000 English, decimated the Royal Navy and felled 4,000 oak trees (it also marked the first time news bulletins of a weather calamity were sold on the street), a public ceremony was held to beg God's forgiveness. Daniel Defoe and Isaac Newton attended.
Today, six decades after scientific warnings about man-made climate change were first sounded, we still describe and therefore understand it in the language of catastrophe and endgames, as the end of the world. (It's not the end of the world: climate change is caused globally, but its effects are local.)
We occasionally test other, more sophisticated approaches - the idea of geo-engineering (mirrors around the earth), international co-operation (the Paris accord), even social engineering (everyone must drive an electric car!) - but we always revert to the hair-raising scare talk. Nearly all the footage and photographs of the floods in Houston, to say nothing of the key words used repeatedly in headlines - ravages, surreal, despair, ordeal, devastation - reinforce this trope of floods as overwhelming, unstoppable, unmanageable. Global warming is more threatening in the long run, we are often warned, than terrorism will ever be. The language and concepts we use to describe climate change never normalize it, but instead keep us scared and paralyzed, cowering blind under the bedsheets. It gets to be a habit.
"This naturally imposes the question," Hulme writes: "How will the contemporary discourse of fear about future climate change be conquered, or are we destined to remain living perpetually under the shadow of climate catastrophe?" Does our ancient habit of describing extreme climate events as disasters guarantee that they will always be just that?
It's a good question. The ironic thing is that we still take an essentially irrational, faith-based approach to the catastrophes climate dumps upon us: We wring our hands and feel bad in the midst of the crisis, and then do almost nothing and pretend the crisis doesn't exist when it abates. Maybe it's time we stopped doing that. Maybe it's time we grew up and got over our atavistic fear of flooding, of cruel Mother Water. If instead of only being terrified and hysterical we at least acknowledged floods as a permanent fixture in our lives, we'd be further ahead than simply pretending - as Houston did until last week, when it couldn't pretend any more - that the water will never get this high.
It is that high, and it's time to plan for it. Not by drowning, as the famous romantic poem by Stevie Smith does not say, but by waving.
Ian Brown is a feature writer at The Globe and Mail.

Load-Date: September 2, 2017


End of Document




FIRST PERSON; PARENTING IN A TIME OF CLIMATE CHANGE; I knew that having children wasn't good for the environment, but I hoped we could raise a citizen capable of changing the world, Emily Dontsos writes
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
February 25, 2020 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE & ARTS; Pg. A16
Length: 868 words
Byline: Emil Dontsos
Body


'Snow!" shouts my 18-month-old in delight every time we leave the house.
He's too young for me to explain that what he's seeing is actually a record-breaking amount of snow for early November in Toronto.
That it could be another sign of climate change, an off-kilter atmosphere throwing more and more meteorological surprises our way. That by the time he's 12, it's highly likely we'll have gone past the point of no return. A 2018 report by the United Nations states that by 2030, we need to cut carbon-dioxide emissions by 45 per cent or it'll be impossible to limit global warming to an increase of 1.5 C by 2100.
He's too little for all of that, and so his eyes shine with the mystery and majesty of the early November snow.
I discovered I was pregnant with him one August morning in the bathroom at work. I kept the news to myself until I got home that night and told my husband he'd soon be a father. Those secret hours were the only ones that belonged to just me and my boy, then just a miraculous flicker of life deep inside of me.
What would the future look like for this new human we'd created? I wondered. I knew that climate change was spiralling out of control; I had read a report from an Australian-based think tank in which some scientists warned that humanity could go extinct before I have a chance to die an old woman in my bed. We'd thought long and hard about whether it was responsible to bring a new life into this reality of uncertainty and, it often feels, chaos.
We were aware that having children is one of the worst things you can do for the environment.
Ultimately, biology and blind optimism - that maybe things would turn around, that maybe it wouldn't be so bad, that we'd raise an engaged citizen capable of changing the world - won out. And so that day, for those few hours, I harboured my secret and hoped that the world would be good to this innocent being who hadn't asked to be born into a world in crisis.
Now a toddler, nature is a dreamscape to him, full of curiosities to examine and explore. The way a butterfly balances with such stillness on the edge of a delicate leaf before spreading its wings wide and fluttering into the distance. The way a puddle ripples when you dip your finger into its murkiness.
The way a lone ant seems to possess such determination as it goes about its business.
At what point will he understand that the love of nature we share comes with a great responsibility to protect it? When will he discover that many of the birds he finds so delightful as they hop around our front yard are dying off in droves? How will I tell him that the Arctic he learns about in books is melting away and starting to take entire species with it?
How will I break the news that Australia is burning, the Amazon rain forest is being destroyed and hurricanes are increasingly wiping out entire communities because humans weighed profit or preservation and chose profit?
Parenting has always been a million tiny heartbreaks, but parenting in the time of climate change comes with its own unique ache. Each time I see that sparkle in my son's eyes as he holds out his hand to touch a flower or examines tiny blades of grass between his fingers or gazes into the verdant trees that sway in the summer wind, I'm desperate to bottle up his innocent admiration for the natural world so he can keep it forever.
But as a parent in the time of climate change, it's my duty to keep that bottle away from him (especially if it's plastic). Even though he doesn't know it yet, his education in protecting the present and future of our Earth has already begun. From his wardrobe of secondhand clothes to his bins of used toys acquired from local buy and sell groups, from his environmentally friendly shampoo to his reusable snack bags, we are doing what we can to limit our family's environmental impact and teach him about sustainability, even if it'll be a few years before he can say the word.
As he grows older, we'll plant trees and join shoreline cleanups, serve as citizen scientists and raise our voices for climate solutions.
Yet right now, as I watch him splash and explore, laugh and blow kisses, I wonder how long true childhood innocence can last these days.
How long can I let him believe the world is an inherently good place, that his future is secure simply because he is loved? How long until he finds out that the Earth that feels so firm beneath his feet is actually hovering on the precipice of - what? Total destruction within our lifetimes? Within two generations, three, four? How long will it take?
But like every parent in the time of climate change, I must continue to break through the fear and anxiety and let that blind, but necessary optimism guide me and my family to action. The same optimism that led us to bring new life into this world in the first place, mingled with the hope I held so close that August morning.
Having a child may be the worst thing you can do for the environment, but when I look into my son's baby blues as we head outdoors and see that spark, that wonder, that love for nature that almost seems too big for his age, I am optimistic, I am hopeful.
As a parent in the time of climate change, I have to be.
Emily Dontsos lives in Toronto.

Load-Date: June 18, 2020


End of Document




Nurturing doubt about climate change is big business - Correction Appended
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
August 12, 2006 Saturday


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2006 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS; Pg. F4
Length: 4244 words
Byline: CHARLES MONTGOMERY
Body


 On a cloudless morning in June, Tim Ball has joined a hundred-odd members of the Comox Valley Probus Club for a buffet of coffee, cinnamon buns and pink lemonade. As this group of retired business people wraps up its monthly meeting, Dr. Ball surveys the crowd and runs a hand over his suntanned dome. 
 He does not appear the least bit fatigued, which is remarkable considering that the 67-year-old former University of Winnipeg professor has spent much of the past couple of months crisscrossing the country, addressing community forums, business groups, newspaper editorial boards and politicians about climate change. 
 He has been nearly as dogged as Al Gore, whose own globe-hopping slide show is the subject of the hit documentary film An Inconvenient Truth.
 But that is where their similarity ends. 
 Dr. Ball clutches a cordless microphone and smiles out at the sea of white hair. He teases the audience about their age, throws in a hockey joke, then tells the crowd that, unlike Mr. Gore, he is a climatologist, and he is not at all panicking about climate change. 
 "The temperature hasn't gone up," he asserts. "But the mood of the world has changed: It has heated up to this belief in global warming." 
 Over the next hour, Dr. Ball stitches together folksy anecdotes with a succession of charts, graphs and pictures to form a collage of doubt about the emerging consensus on climate change. There's a map of Canada covered in ice 20,000 years ago - proof, he says, that wild swings in the Earth's temperature are perfectly normal. There's a graph suggesting that atmospheric carbon dioxide is at its lowest level in 600 million years. 
 Gaining momentum, he declares that Environment Canada and other agencies fabricated the climate-change scare in order to attract funding for propaganda and expensive attempts to model climate change using supercomputers. 
 "Environment Canada can't even predict the weather!" he bellows. "How can you tell me that they have any idea what it's going to be like 100 years from now if they can't tell me what the weather is going to be like in four months, or even next week?" 
 As proof of the climate-change conspiracy, Dr. Ball shows the crowd a graph with a kinked line jigging across it. This is the famous "hockey-stick graph" published by Pennsylvania State University scientist Michael Mann and his team in 1999, which shows temperatures to be fairly stable for hundreds of years, then rising rapidly in the past few decades. Mr. Gore, among many others, uses it to illustrate the case for global warming. 
 Dr. Ball claims that the Mann team "cooked the books," and that its blunders were confirmed just a few days previously, in a report to the Congress by the U.S. Academies of Science. "He threw out all the data that didn't fit his hypothesis," Dr. Ball says, without offering evidence to support the charge. His outrage is now as searing as the baking sun outside. "I personally think [Mann] should be in jail!" 
 In fact, Dr. Ball says, the real danger for Canada is not warming, but cooling: "It's like Y2K," he concludes. "We all just need to calm down." 
 He is met with raucous applause. It is as though a weight has been lifted from the audience's collective shoulders: What a relief to learn that this global crisis, one they keep hearing will bring extreme weather, submerge small island nations and devastate economies, may be nothing to worry about. 
 Few in the audience have any idea that Dr. Ball hasn't published on climate science in any peer-reviewed scientific journal in more than 14 years. They do not know that he has been paid to speak to federal MPs by a public-relations company that works for energy firms. Nor are they aware that his travel expenses are covered by a group supported by donors from the Alberta oil patch. 
 Most Canadians recognize, of course, that fossil-fuel businesses could lose large sums if the federal government moves to curtail greenhouse-gas emissions. 
 But they may not realize that by quietly backing the movement behind maverick figures such as Dr. Ball, the fuel industry - with its close ties to the party that brought Prime Minister Stephen Harper to power - is succeeding, bit by bit, in influencing both public opinion and Canadian policy on global warming, including the international Kyoto accord. 
 An Ipsos-Reid poll released in May found that, despite increasing scientific evidence to the contrary, four of every 10 Canadians surveyed still agreed with Dr. Ball's assertion that climate change is due to natural warming and cooling patterns. 
 "He is a very entertaining performer, very slick," says Neil Brown, the Conservative MP for Calgary-Nose Hill, who attended a presentation Dr. Ball made to a caucus of Calgary Tories. "When someone shows up and tells me that the Earth is actually cooling, then it gets my attention."
 The scientific mainstream is unequivocal that global warming is real, happening at a rate unprecedented in human history, and most likely caused mainly by man-made greenhouse gases. Last year, the national academies of science of all the Group of Eight industrial nations, representing most scientists in the developed world, sent a joint message to their leaders urging prompt action.
 In February, the United Nations and the World Meteorological Society's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which brings together more than 2,000 scientists to review tens of thousands of peer-reviewed papers on climate science, will release its fourth report. The authors say it will contain a warning that human-caused global warming could drive the Earth's temperature to levels far higher than previously predicted. 
 Andrew Weaver, the Canada Research Chair in Climate Modelling and Analysis at the University of Victoria, and a lead author of a chapter in the upcoming IPCC report, gives a frustrated sigh at the mention of Tim Ball's cross-country tour. 
 "He says stuff that is just plain wrong. But when you are talking to crowds, when you are talking on TV, there is no challenge, there is no peer review," Prof. Weaver says. 
 Like other senior scientists, he charges that Dr. Ball's arguments are a grab bag of irrelevancies and falsehoods: "Ball says that our climate models do not [account for the warming effects of] water vapour. That's absurd. They all do."
 Likewise, he says, Dr. Ball's claims that climate change could be explained by variations in the Earth's orbit or by sunspots are discounted by widely available data. 
 Many of Dr. Ball's other points are easily refuted. Consider the hockey-stick graph: He was right that the U.S. Academies of Science had delivered a review of climate science to Congress. 
 But their report concluded that temperatures in the past 25 years really have been the highest in 400 years. Moreover, the panelists assured reporters that there was no evidence at all that the Mann team cherry-picked its data - completely contradicting what Dr. Ball told his audience in Comox. 
 "What Ball is doing is not about science," Prof. Weaver says. "It is about politics." 
 Leaders throughout Europe have accepted the IPCC position on climate change, and have been looking for ways to take collective action, primarily via the Kyoto accord. Yet North Americans have lagged behind, hamstrung by a lingering debate in the media and among politicians about climate science.
 How did this doubt take hold? 
 In a now-infamous 2003 memo, U.S. pollster and consultant Frank Luntz advised Republican politicians to cultivate uncertainty when talking about climate change: "Voters believe that there is no consensus about global warming within the scientific community. Should the public come to believe the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly. Therefore, you need to continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue in the debate," wrote Mr. Luntz (the italics are his own). 
 Nurturing doubt about climate-change science has become big business for public-relations companies and lobbyists south of the border. 
 From 2000 to 2003, Exxon Mobil Corp. alone gave more than $8.6-million (U.S.) to think tanks, consumer groups and policy organizations engaged in anti-Kyoto messaging, according to the company's own records. Those groups promote the minority of scientists who still dispute the IPCC consensus on climate change, creating the appearance of widespread scientific disagreement. 
 Mr. Luntz met with Mr. Harper in May, but the Conservatives already had adopted his advice. The Prime Minister was emphasizing that climate change was but an "emerging science" long before he cancelled an array of programs designed to promote energy conservation.
 For example, Environment Minister Rona Ambrose, the MP for Edmonton-Spruce Grove, has talked up the flaws of the Kyoto accord, while steadfastly rejecting its modest emission-reduction targets. On June 30, the government simply got rid of its main climate-change website (www.climatechange.gc.ca), which once contained educational materials for teachers. 
 However, given the resonance of the climate-change issue with most Canadians, political leaders cannot afford to denounce mainstream science too loudly. That task has instead been taken up by activists in the Conservative Party's Alberta heartland. 
 Over the past four years, a coalition of oil-patch geologists, Tory insiders, anonymous donors and oil-industry PR professionals has come together to manufacture public consent for Canada's withdrawal from Kyoto. Through a Calgary-based society ironically dubbed the Friends of Science, they have leveraged Tim Ball and a handful of other "climate skeptics" onto podiums and editorial pages across the country.
 While the federal government stalls, the skeptics preach doubt, softening the public for a diluted "made-in-Canada" climate policy. Dr. Ball acknowledges that when he meets with business leaders and politicians, he advises them to weigh the high price of action against more cost-effective "lip service." 
 These efforts may help delay emissions caps for years. Not bad for a campaign that began with a bitch session among a clutch of oil-patch retirees. 
 "We started out without a nickel, mostly retired geologists, geophysicists and retired businessmen, all old fogeys," says Albert Jacobs, a geologist and retired oil-explorations manager, proudly remembering the first meeting of the Friends of Science Society in the curling lounge of Calgary's Glencoe Club back in 2002.
 "We all had experience dealing with Kyoto, and we decided that a lot of it was based on science that was biased, incomplete and politicized." 
 Mr. Jacobs says he suspects that the Kyoto accord was devised as a tool by United Nations bureaucrats to push the world toward a global socialist government under the United Nations. "You know," he says, "to this day, there is no scientific proof that human-caused CO{-2} is the main cause of global warming." 
 He managed to insert that last message into the Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists' official statement on climate change in 2003. 
 But he and his fellow Friends of Science decided that if they wanted to have broad influence on climate policy, they needed money to stage events, create publicity materials, commercials and a website, and reach the media and politicians. Dr. Ball spoke at the group's first fundraiser. 
 But the event didn't raise enough for the group's plans. There was plenty of money for the anti-Kyoto cause in the oil patch, but the Friends dared not take money directly from energy companies. The optics, Mr. Jacobs acknowledges, would have been terrible. 
 This conundrum, he says, was solved by University of Calgary political scientist Barry Cooper, a well-known associate of Mr. Harper.
 As is his privilege as a faculty member, Prof. Cooper set up a fund at the university dubbed the Science Education Fund. Donors were encouraged to give to the fund through the Calgary Foundation, which administers charitable giving in the Calgary area and has a policy of guarding donors' identities. The Science Education Fund, in turn, provides money for the Friends of Science, as well as Dr. Ball's travel expenses, according to Mr. Jacobs. 
 And who are the donors? No one will say. 
 The money is "not exclusively from the oil and gas industry," Prof. Cooper says. "It's also from foundations and individuals. I can't tell you the names of those companies, or the foundations for that matter, or the individuals."
 When pushed in another interview, however, Prof. Cooper admits, "There were some oil companies." 
 The brilliance of the plan is that by going through the foundation and the university fund, donors get anonymity and their donations get charitable status. In the past two years, the Science Education Fund has received more than $200,000 in charitable donations through the Calgary Foundation. Yet its marketing director, Kerry Longpré, said in June that she had never heard of the Friends of Science. The foundation, she said, deals only with the university, which is left to administer donations as it sees fit. 
 Prof. Cooper and Mr. Jacobs both affirm that the Science Education Fund paid the bills for the Friends' anti-Kyoto video, Climate Catastrophe Cancelled. It features Canada's most vocal climate skeptics, including Dr. Ball, University of Ottawa hydrologist and paleoclimatologist Ian Clark, Carleton University paleoclimatologist Tim Patterson, University of Ottawa lecturer Tad Murty and retired meteorologist Madhav Khandekar, who has done communications for the oil-industry-funded Cooler Heads Coalition.
 It also includes Sallie Baliunas, a senior scientist with the George C. Marshall Institute in Washington, a fiercely anti-Kyoto think tank that has received hundreds of thousands of dollars from Exxon Mobil. 
 Roman Cooney, the University of Calgary's vice-president of external relations, insists that the Friends of Science is neither affiliated with nor endorsed by the school. And when he saw the university's coat of arms on early copies of the anti-Kyoto video, Mr. Cooney ordered Prof. Cooper to remove it. 
 There is a letter-sized piece of paper bearing the words "Friends of Science" taped to the wall in Kevin Grandia's Vancouver office. From that single sheet, he has strung a web of string, leading to the names of individuals, free-market think tanks, private companies and charitable foundations. And from them more strings lead, invariably, to the names of energy corporations. 
 Mr. Grandia is being paid full-time by James Hoggan and Associates, a public-relations firm, to examine the connections between fossil-fuel companies, the climate skeptics and the PR industry itself. 
 "Follow the money trail," says Mr. Grandia, ball of string in hand. "Why the hell do all of these lead back to oil and gas?" 
 Take Fred Singer, a former professor of environmental sciences at the University of Virginia, who supplied one of the charts for Dr. Ball's slide show. A string leads from Mr. Singer's name straight to Exxon Mobil, which has given $20,000 (U.S.) to his Science and Environment Policy Project, according to the oil company's 1998 and 2000 grant records.
 Other strings loop from Mr. Singer to Shell, Arco, Unocal, Sun Energy and the American Gas Association. In a Massachusetts Superior Court deposition, he acknowledged that he had consulted for all those companies, as well as the Global Climate Coalition, whose members in industry spent tens of millions of dollars to fight the Kyoto accord in the 1990s. 
 Mr. Grandia's boss, James Hoggan, chuckles when he sees the wall of paper and string. Mr. Hoggan, whose clients include Alcan, CP Rail, Norske Canada and the David Suzuki Foundation, has assigned two of his 19 staffers to this bit of intra-industry tail-chasing. (It is supported by a donation of $300,000 from former Internet entrepreneur John Lefebvre, now an environmentalist and philanthropist.)
 Mr. Hoggan says he got involved simply because he was angry that his peers in PR were muddying public understanding of climate science. "For years, there have been these kind of campaigns that are aimed at manipulating public opinion, and not necessarily manipulating it in the direction of good public policy, but trying to fight government regulations that will cost industry money.
 "It happened with the tobacco industry. It happened with the chemical industry. It happened with the asbestos industry. And now it's happening with climate change," he says. 
 "It makes me extremely angry. I don't think that the people who are involved in this should be able to get away with it. My goal is to find out as much as we can about these people and make it public. Who are they? Who is paying them? What motivates them? How is it they can sleep at night?" 
 Several of Mr. Hoggan's peers show up on Mr. Grandia's Friends of Science spider web. First is Morten Paulsen of the PR giant, Fleishman-Hillard, who wears three hats. In one, he's a long-time Tory/Reform/Canadian Alliance activist - the co-chair of the Alberta Conservatives' 2006 convention, and one-time director of communications for Preston Manning. In another, Mr. Paulsen is the registered lobbyist for ConocoPhillips Canada, the country's third-largest oil-and-natural-gas production and exploration company.
 Mr. Paulsen also happens to be the registered lobbyist for the Friends of Science. Indeed, he used to be listed as the main public-relations contact on the Friends' website. Then, in June, his Tory connections were revealed on Mr. Grandia's blog (desmogblog.org). Mr. Paulsen's name no longer appears on the site. 
 Then there is Tom Harris, Ottawa director of the High Park Group, which is a registered lobbyist for the Canadian Electricity Association and the Canadian Gas Association.
 Mr. Harris has written several essays attacking Kyoto and the science behind climate change for the National Post and the CanWest newspaper chain. In his articles, he quotes several members of the Friends of Science advisory board - including Dr. Ball and Profs. Khandekar, Patterson and Murty - but he never mentions his own connections to the Calgary organization. 
 In 2002, for example, Mr. Harris organized the Friends' first Ottawa press conference in 2002, and helped to make their video, according to Mr. Jacobs. And as recently as May, he organized a trip to Ottawa for Dr. Ball, paying him $2,000 to give a presentation to federal MPs.
 The election of a Conservative government to Ottawa, after all, presented a golden opportunity for the Friends of Science to try to reopen the debate on Kyoto. This spring, they circulated thousands of Climate Catastrophe Cancelled DVDs among politicians and news outlets, ran a radio ad on stations in Alberta, put up a website, and jetted Dr. Ball across the country for face time with media, business and politicians. 
 The climax of the spring campaign was an open letter to Mr. Harper, printed in the Financial Post and other CanWest newspapers on April 6. The letter, signed by "60 experts in climate and related scientific disciplines," exhorted the Prime Minister to hold public consultations on the government's climate-change plan. 
 Members of the climate and meteorological science establishment quickly noted that only a third of the names on the petition were Canadian. Many of them were economists and geologists, not climate experts. One of them, Gordon Swaters, a professor of applied mathematics at the University of Alberta, later said it had been unclear what he was signing and he disagreed with the letter completely. 
 Several of the other signatories had received money from the oil, gas and coal industries in the United States - Patrick Michaels of the University of Virginia, for example, was handed more than $100,000 for climate skeptic work by the coal-based Intermountain Rural Electric Association this July, according to the Associated Press. 
 "These people are ignorant. Well-meaning, but just plain ignorant," fumed Ian Rutherford, executive director of the Canadian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society, which represents 800 Canadian atmospheric and oceanic scientists and professionals.
 "The Friends of Science are driven by ideology and some kind of a misplaced understanding of how the world works. Many are what you would call paleogeologists. Looking at the geological record, they see evidence of wild swings in climate. Of course these swings are there: If you go back hundreds of millions of years, 40 million years, even 400,000 years, you will find wild swings in temperature over long periods of time. But that's irrelevant. There was hardly any life on Earth, let alone human life, at that time. So their time scale is all out of whack. 
 "None of them ever come to our scientific conferences. They know they would be laughed out of the building. The stuff they say, some of it is so nonsensical it's hardly worth discussing." 
 In its own letter to the Prime Minister, the Meteorological and Oceanographic Society objected to the Friends' complaints about a lack of debate, pointing out that Canadian climate scientists from universities, government and the private sector participate actively in the IPCC's international reviews. The government, it argued, should be relying on IPCC reports for good scientific information. 
 But various levels of government have gone on to give Dr. Ball an audience. This spring, he addressed the Alberta Tories in Calgary, as well as the province's standing policy committee on energy and sustainable development. On his trip to Ottawa in May, he met with the Ottawa Citizen editorial board, and gave his slide show to a half-dozen federal Conservative MPs and a clutch of Tory staffers. (Dr. Ball is not listed in the federal government's Lobbyists' Registry.) 
 He made a particular impression on Brad Trost, MP for Saskatoon Humboldt: "It really broadened the perspective. You know, maybe there is more uncertainty on [climate change]. Maybe we need to put more research into this to get a better idea," Mr. Trost says. "Just like the Y2K problem, we were a little oversold on that one. You sort of wonder. Just because something is repeated often, it doesn't make it true." 
 "In public relations," Mr. Hoggan says, "we call this the echo-chamber technique. You have Tim Ball saying the polar bears are fine. Then you get Tim Ball's PR guy writing the same thing. And then Tim Ball takes to the road, talks to reporters and does press briefings, making sure the message is repeated over and over.
 "The effect is to delay public judgment on climate change, and thereby delay policy." 
 In his speeches and interviews, Tim Ball consistently denies any know-ledge that he is receiving funds from oil companies. 
 "I wish I was being paid by them," he deadpanned at his Comox show. "Maybe then I could afford their products." 
 Like Mr. Jacobs, Dr. Ball says he doesn't know, and doesn't want to know, who forks out the money for his expenses and activism. He simply wants to talk about the science, and will do so to whomever will listen.
 Certainly, climate skepticism isn't exactly making Dr. Ball rich. He says that although he has earned as much as $5,000 for speeches to industry groups such as lime producers, he more frequently gives talks for free. 
 He is a warm, likable character, and there is no reason to believe he is not sincere in his concern for science and public policy. He clearly relishes the spotlight, and seems to grow taller, sharper and brighter on stage. He punches the air with his microphone, and breaks out into a broad grin at the crowd's response to his jabs at Environment Canada. 
 Still, it must take something more than conviction to propel him through the more than 100 barn-burning speeches he gave across the country in the past year. He angrily claims that his stance has led to being denied research funding from Environment Canada, although he admits that he has not personally applied for federal climate-research funding in more than a decade. 
 One old colleague at the University of Winnipeg puts Dr. Ball's passion down to sheer anti-authoritarianism. "He is a contrarian. He lives to challenge authority," says the professor of geography, who would speak only anonymously.
 "If the IPCC scientists suddenly recanted," he jokes, "Tim would be the first one out there saying, 'Wait a minute, global warming really is happening!' " 
 Dr. Ball's adversaries acknow-ledge that skeptical inquiry serves to make the science better. They just wish he would conduct new research and practice his skepticism on the pages of the peer-reviewed journals.
 For his part, Dr. Ball insists that the reason he lobbies so tirelessly on the issue is his frustration that the skeptics' arguments aren't reflected in the pronouncements of scientific institutions such as the IPCC. Perhaps so, but his hard work is helping weaken the power of such internationally respected institutions. 
 The proof, for Friends of Science founder Albert Jacobs, is in the policy.
 "Our success is very recent, and our success is tied to the Conservative government," Mr. Jacobs says. "Rona Ambrose, she has been tearing down that Kyoto building." 
 The next big challenge, he says, is to reach children. The Friends of Science is now lobbying to have its message included in the grade-school curriculum. 
Charles Montgomery is the Vancouver-based author of The Shark God. Its Canadian edition, The Last Heathen, won the 2005 Charles Taylor Prize for Non-fiction.
Correction


  Retired meteorologist Madhav Khandekar is not among the spokesmen in Climate Catastrophe Cancelled, a video produced for the Calgary-based Friends of Science. Incorrect information appeared in an Aug. 12 article in Focus.   
Correction-Date: August 24, 2006


Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: September 21, 2006


End of Document




ANALYSIS; Vatican summit signals shift in climate change discussion
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 23, 2015 Thursday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 730 words
Byline: OMAR EL AKKAD
Dateline: PORTLAND, ORE. 
Body


For the past few months, it seemed that meeting the Pope was all Portland Mayor Charlie Hales could talk about. In myriad speeches, talks and tweets, the politician seemed genuinely excited to be one of about 65 municipal leaders chosen by the Vatican to attend a summit this week focused primarily on combatting climate change.
The conference, in which mayors of some of the world's biggest cities declared that humaninduced climate change is real and must be addressed, is aimed at influencing world leaders ahead of a major international climate change summit later this year.
But more than a stage for the simple signing of declarations, the Vatican summit represents a fundamental shift in how the issue of climate change is framed.
Not only did the participants sign their names to a joint statement declaring that human-induced climate change must be countered, they also agreed that doing so is a "moral imperative."
The makeup of the attendees reflects not only some of the world's most populous urban centres, but also areas where support for the Pope's environmental message is likely to resonate.
The West Coast of North America is heavily represented, including the meeting's sole Canadian representative, Vancouver Mayor Gregor Robertson.
By focusing its energy on getting the mayors of the world's biggest cities on board, the Vatican is hoping to engage what is perhaps the most underrepresented demographic at the climate change table. Most of the human-created emissions come from heavily populated urban areas, yet most climate change pacts and policies are negotiated at national and international levels. As a result, city-level leadership rarely has a strong say in how climate change is addressed.
"It's increasingly clear that we, the local leaders of the world, have many tools, more than we may have in fact realized, and we must use them boldly even as our national governments hesitate," said New York Mayor Bill de Blasio, in a speech during the summit.
Mr. de Blasio's speech, like many other mayors' statements during the conference, indicates just how emboldened some of the leaders have become thanks to the support of the Vatican. In addressing the urgent need for serious action on climate change, "his Holiness challenges us, he challenges us not to be captives, not to be slavish to consumerism," said Mr. de Blasio.
Recently, the Pope has emerged as perhaps the most important, unlikely ally to the environmental movement. Arguing that the fossil fuel-driven economy is exploiting and slowly ruining the planet, the world's most powerful religious leader has given the push for a shift to renewable resources unprecedented momentum. In an encyclical dedicated to environmental issues, the Pope has sought to tie the exploitation of the planet to the exploitation of the world's poor and powerless. The only other issue discussed at this week's summit besides climate change was human trafficking.
At a municipal level, the impact of the Pope's support is already being seen in very concrete ways. Mr. Hales recently cited overwhelming public opposition (driven in large part by environmental concerns) as reason to oppose a multimilliondollar propane export facility at the Port of Portland proposed by Canadian pipeline giant Pembina.
At the summit, the mayors of New York and San Francisco, among others, also announced new measures and guidelines designed to help cut emissions.
The mayor of Stockholm urged international climate change negotiators to go one step further and begin discussing the outright exclusion of fossil fuels as an energy option for the future, focusing exclusively on renewables.
But after two days of universal agreement, the mayors now return to countries in which climate change action still faces pockets of stiff resistance. In the United States, for example, the country is readying for a presidential election in which few, if any, of the 16 Republican candidates advocate for strong new environmental measures.
Still, the Vatican's conference comes just a few months before the Paris Summit, a UN convention designed to achieve a universal, binding agreement on climate change. As such, a joint declaration backed by the Pope may well influence the Paris proceedings. Indeed, many of the Vatican meeting's attendants described the Paris Summit as perhaps the last real chance for serious, worldwide action on climate change.

Load-Date: July 23, 2015


End of Document




ENVIRONMENT; Cities: Step up and act on climate change; Mayors around the world are tackling this challenge by sharing ideas and strategies that lead to action
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
October 7, 2015 Wednesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2015 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENT; Pg. A15
Length: 853 words
Byline: MICHAEL LOOMERG, GREGOR ROERTSON
Body


As the largest country in the Western Hemisphere, Canada has a special role to play in tackling the threat of global climate change. Canadian cities, which are on the front lines of this battle, must help lead the way.
In recent years, destructive floods have caused billions of dollars in damage to Toronto and Calgary, and this summer saw a record number of forest fires in British Columbia, resulting in airquality advisories in Vancouver.
While it may be impossible to tie any one weather event to climate change, it's also impossible to deny that the impacts of climate change can cause serious economic and environmental damage to cities.
Fortunately, cities can provide many of the answers to climaterelated disasters by adopting policies and making investments that both reduce climate pollution and mitigate climate-related risks.
While news-media attention tends to focus on the partisan debates about national policies, cities are playing a leading role in confronting this challenge.
Around the world, mayors are tackling climate change by sharing ideas and strategies that lead to action. Last year, the United Nations (with support from Bloomberg Philanthropies) launched a global initiative called the Compact of Mayors. Cities that join agree to transparent reporting of their actions on climate change and commit to using a common measuring stick to determine how much progress they are making. This allows their citizens to hold them accountable for reaching their goals - and compare how their city stacks up against others.
Over the past year, 197 cities from 53 countries have joined the compact. President Barack Obama has set a goal of having 100 U.S. cities commit to the compact.
Canadian cities such as Calgary, Edmonton, Halifax, Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver and Windsor, Ont., have signed on to the Compact of Mayors, building momentum for further climate action in Canada. We hope many more Canadian cities will join.
The fact is, when it comes to a city's energy and environmental choices, most mayors aren't waiting for their provincial or national governments to take action. Percapita carbon emissions in Canadian cities have fallen 20 per cent over the past 25 years. Cities have direct control over 40 per cent to 50 per cent of Canada's emissions and, across the country, we're seeing cities taking the lead and proving that they are the most innovative and decisive level of government.
In Vancouver, city council has approved a bold target of shifting to 100-per-cent renewable energy throughout the city, which is now driving innovation in everything from adoption of electric-vehicle technology to using low-carbon district energy to heat and cool new residential developments.
Edmonton recently approved a strategy to improve energy efficiency in city buildings, increase renewable energy, explore district energy systems and power more city operations with clean electricity. Montreal has an aggressive target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 30 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020, and an electric-vehicle charging network that supports its strong uptake of electric vehicles.
These actions not only reduce climate pollution and improve the local environment, they create economic benefits, enhance community resilience and provide countless health benefits for residents.
The Compact of Mayors is just one example of the collaboration being taken by governments around the world to address climate change. Ontario and Quebec are moving toward cap-and-trade programs, and British Columbia is building on the success of its carbon tax with a new "Climate Leadership Plan." In recent weeks we've seen major announcements from China and the United States to reduce their pollution and invest in clean energy. The urgency of climate change is undeniable, but fortunately we are seeing positive momentum as we head into December's international climate summit in Paris.
Climate change is a global challenge, and the more that cities around the world work together and learn from one another, the more progress we'll be able to make - and the more national governments will feel pressure to act. Our hope is that more Canadian cities will step forward to join the Compact of Mayors and commit to raising the bar on tracking their progress on climate change. Although the issue has received little attention during the federal election campaign, the next government will need to work with cities across the country if Canada is to meet international climate-change goals.
No single action will solve the climate crisis. It will take steady change, across all sectors and in cities large and small, in every country, to get where we need to be. The solutions are within our grasp, and now we need the leadership to see them through.
As we're seeing through the Compact of Mayors, cities in Canada and around the world are stepping up to support one another and provide the leadership needed to meet the climatechange crisis.
Michael Bloomberg is a former three-term mayor of New York and the UN Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Cities and Climate Change. Gregor Robertson is mayor of Vancouver.

Load-Date: October 7, 2015


End of Document




Climate change may be deadly  El Nino phenomenon helps scientists learn how temperature shifts affect disease
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
August 11, 1998 Tuesday


Copyright 1998 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 902 words
Byline: WILLIAM STEVENS New York Times Service; NYT
Dateline: New York 
Body


Scientists have long theorized that climatic changes related to global warming could unleash outbreaks of diseases like malaria, dengue fever, cholera and heat stroke. But with the modest amount of warming experienced so far, they have been unable to produce much hard evidence.
Now the experts have a research gift from an unlikely benefactor: El Nino. Scientists who track such things say that combined with an underlying global-warming trend, El Nino will probably make 1998 the warmest year in several centuries.
And the heavy rains, droughts and other extreme weather fostered by El Nino over the last year are precisely what many scientists expect will also result from a predicted warming of the globe in the decades ahead.
So, in the belief that 1997 and 1998 may provide a taste of what is to come, those who pay attention to the health effects of climate are now pulling together data about weather-related illness and death in recent months.
While most of the evidence is circumstantial, consisting of correlations and coincidences, it suggests that amid all the scientific smoke there is some fire.
These are some of the clues:
 The World Health Organization reports "quantitative leaps" in the incidence of malaria around the world, coincident with extreme weather associated with El Nino. Both heat and variations in rainfall affect transmission of the disease by mosquitoes.
 Tens of thousands of people in Kenya and Somalia were afflicted by another mosquito-borne disease, Rift Valley fever. And at least 200 died after the heaviest rains since 1961, attributed to El Nino, fell on the region.
 The incidence of cholera increased markedly over the past year in Latin America, where an epidemic had already been in progress for seven years, and in parts of Africa. In both cases the surge was associated with heavy rainfall and floods linked to El Nino.
 In the southern Rockies, a warm, wet winter brought on by El Nino has produced abundant food and cover for deer mice, which transmit the deadly hantavirus to humans. The number of mice has increased, and the deaths of three people have been ascribed to the disease. U.S. disease-control authorities are still analyzing the problem.
 Forest fires in Southeast Asia, made possible by a killing drought attributed to El Nino, subjected hundreds of thousands of people to respiratory ailments.
While this and similar evidence is sifted and tested, scientists are also beginning to focus more closely on the health impact of extreme weather quite apart from El Nino.
For example, in the United States, they are finding there is a statistically significant association between heavy rainstorms and outbreaks of water-borne diseases. These include hepatitis, E. coli infections and the cryptosporidium parasite that infected 400,000 people and killed 50 to 100 in Milwaukee in 1993.
If the relationship between heavy rain and disease is solid and climate experts are right, North America may be in for a surge of climatically induced water-borne illness.
Analyses of the last century's weather records by the U.S. National Climatic Data Center have found that extremely heavy rainstorms have become more common. For example, single rainfalls on the order of 20 and 22 centimetres each deluged the Boston area in mid-June, the Ohio Valley in late June and south-central Tennessee in mid-July.
Climatologists say this is just the kind of increase in extreme rainstorms that would be expected in a warming atmosphere, which holds more moisture and causes more water to evaporate from the oceans. The heavier rain that results is more likely to cause floods that not only kill people, but also overwhelm drinking-water purification systems.
"If extreme-weather events are part of a changing climate," said Dr. Paul Epstein, associate director of the Center for Health and the Global Environment at Harvard Medical School, "we've seen lots of evidence of the profound health effects associated with climate change this year."
East Africa, he said, especially illustrates the risk to health posed by climatic factors. There, simultaneous outbreaks of cholera, malaria and Rift Valley fever followed heavy rains and flooding.
Dr. Epstein has long held the view that global warming will have a serious effect on health. His group at Harvard has also made a compilation of possible health effects of El Nino in the last year.
The view has provoked argument. In the always-contentious debate over climate change, it has been especially difficult to get a handle on the question of health and disease. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an international group of scientists, recognized this in its 1995 report.
The panel predicted that if emissions of heat-trapping industrial-waste gases like carbon dioxide were not reduced, the average surface temperature of the Earth would rise by about two Celsius degrees by the end of the next century.
This is roughly half the amount of warming experienced since the depths of the last ice age. About one degree of warming has taken place in the last century, and the latest surface readings combined with tree-ring studies made by climatologists at the University of East Anglia in Britain indicate that 1997 was the warmest year in the past 1,000 years and that 1998 will probably be warmer still.
Some recent events, the intergovernmental panel said in 1995, might be early signals of climate-induced changes in human health.

Load-Date: January 10, 2007


End of Document




White House report on climate change has a warning, and a silver lining
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
June 17, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 577 words
Byline: SETH BORENSTEIN, Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 Rising sea levels, sweltering temperatures, deeper droughts, and heavier downpours - global warming's serious effects are already here and getting worse, the Obama administration warned yesterday in the grimmest, most urgent language on climate change ever to come out of any White House. 
 But amid the warnings, scientists and government officials seemed to go out of their way to soften the message. It is still not too late to prevent some of the worst consequences, they said, by acting aggressively to reduce world emissions of heat-trapping gases, primarily carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels. 
 The new report differs from a similar draft issued with little fanfare or context by George W. Bush's administration last year. It is more dire about what's happening and more optimistic about what can be done. 
 The Obama administration is backing a bill in Congress that would limit heat-trapping pollution from power plants, refineries and factories. A key player on a climate bill in the Senate, California Democrat Barbara Boxer, said the report adds "urgency to the growing momentum in Congress" for passing a law. 
 "It's not too late to act," said Jane Lubchenco, one of several agency officials at a White House briefing.
 "Decisions made now will determine whether we get big changes or small ones." But what has happened already is not good, she said: "It's happening in our own backyards and it affects the kind of things people care about." 
 Dr. Lubchenco, a marine biologist, heads the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
 In one of its key findings, the report warned: "Thresholds will be crossed, leading to large changes in climate and ecosystems." The survival of some species could be affected, it said. 
 The document, a climate status report required periodically by Congress, was a collaboration by about three dozen academic, government and institute scientists. It contains no new research, but it paints a fuller and darker picture of global warming in the United States than previous studies. 
 Mr. Bush was ultimately forced by a lawsuit to issue a draft report last year, and that document was the basis for this one. Barack Obama's science adviser John Holdren called the report non-partisan, started by a Republican administration and finished by a Democratic one. 
 "The observed climate changes that we report are not opinions to be debated. They are facts to be dealt with," said one of the report's chief authors, Jerry Melillo of Marine Biological Lab in Woods Hole, Mass.
 "We can act now to avoid the worst impacts." 
 Among the things Dr. Melillo said he would like to avoid are more flooding disasters in New Orleans and an upheaval of the world's food supply. 
 The scientists softened the report from an earlier draft that said "tipping points have already been reached and have led to large changes." 
 Dr. Melillo said that is because some of the changes seen so far are still reversible. 
 Even so, Tom Karl of the National Climatic Data Center said that at least one tipping point - irreversible sea level rise - has been passed. 
 Environmental groups praised the report as a call for action, with the Union of Concerned Scientists calling it what "America needs to effectively respond to climate change." 
 Scott Segal, a Washington lobbyist for the coal industry, was more cautious: "Fast action without sufficient planning is a route to potential economic catastrophe with little environmental gain." 

Load-Date: June 17, 2009


End of Document




Ottawa hesitates to seize opportunity to tackle climate change; OPINION
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
July 14, 2020 Tuesday, Ontario Edition


Copyright 2020 All material copyright The Globe and Mail or its licensors. All Rights Reserved
Section: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B1,B4
Length: 1266 words
Byline: ADAM RADWANSKI
Body


Lead
Governments around the world are announcing ambitious green-recovery plans, or visibly laying the groundwork to do so.
Germany has already launched a comprehensive emissions reduction package worth more than $60-billion, with France and other European countries sending clear signals about following suit in using stimulus spending to address climate change.
Texte/Text
South Korea has pledged big investments in low-carbon infrastructure and clean-technology development, with other Asian countries taking more tentative steps in the same direction.
U.S. Democrats have prepared highly detailed climate-related spending proposals, waiting for Joe Biden if he wins November's presidential election.
Meanwhile in Canada, a government that entered the pandemic with clean-economy transition at the heart of its mandate is unusually reticent about how it will capitalize on the biggest economic disruption since the Great Depression to advance that agenda.
Last week, on the same day that Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer delivered an economic update that included a commitment of more than $5-billion to decarbonize buildings, Canadian Finance Minister Bill Morneau presented his version of the same thing in the form of a "fiscal snapshot" - and declined to give Canadians much sense of his government's long-term recovery plans, green or otherwise.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's Liberals are unready to announce policies to try to rebuild the economy in a sustainable way. With the odd exception - such as Industry Minister Navdeep Bains recently granting an interview in which he spoke broadly about wanting to target clean-technology sectors such as electric vehicle and battery manufacturing, and Natural Resources Minister Seamus O'Regan vaguely promising a strategy to build a hydrogen industry - ministers who would be leading green-recovery planning are mostly unwilling to even discuss which options they're considering.
Four months after the economy was shut down by COVID-19, the official line out of Ottawa is that it's still too early to move beyond the immediate emergency and address what it could look like on the other side.
It's a reluctance that seems bizarre from the Liberals during a hugely pivotal moment in the climate-change fight, in which governments have their last best chance to spend big on meeting emissions reduction targets before a likely period of austerity kicks in. But it has something to do with internal cabinet politics.
At the current crisis's outset back in March, word emerged from within government that three cabinet members - Environment Minister Jonathan Wilkinson, Infrastructure Minister Catherine McKenna and Heritage Minister Steven Guilbeault, all of whom have climate-policy backgrounds - were taking an early lead in considering green-recovery policies. The idea, as expressed at the time by the Prime Minister's Office and other corners of government, was that because those ministers weren't dealing as much as some others with day-to-day emergency response, they could start thinking more long-term.
That message subsequently changed, in a subtle but seemingly significant way. The work of that trio, which included lots of outreach to environmental groups and other policy advocates, started being more dismissively described by officials in the PMO and the offices of more senior ministers as something for which they volunteered, with the undertone that the government's real decision makers would turn their attention to such matters later. And ministers such as Mr. Wilkinson and Ms. McKenna, usually eager to talk publicly about climate-related policies, turned circumspect.
Based on recent conversations with members of the government and environmental groups that have been engaging with it, granted anonymity so they could speak freely without fear of reprisal, there is a difference of opinion within cabinet about how much of a climate-focused recovery plan there should be.
The common perception among those sources is that Chrystia Freeland, the powerful Deputy Prime Minister who chairs cabinet's COVID-19 response committee, is a key figure in that dynamic. Ms. Freeland is the government's liaison with provincial governments, many of which are likely to be skeptical about a heavy climate focus.
She is the closest Mr. Trudeau has to a minister from Alberta, which is where she grew up, and is wary of federal policies that could be seen as hostile to the fossil fuel industry. And she is said by those close to her to be less convinced than many other Liberals that climate ambition was a decisive factor in their re-election to government last year.
While Ms. Freeland is apparently lukewarm about a green tint to long-term recovery spending, Mr. Morneau's department has been pouring cold water on the prospect of big stimulus spending in any form. Finance officials have continued to suggest, within government and to those outside it, that the economy may sufficiently rebound on its own once pandemic-related restrictions are finally lifted. And to the extent that stimulus is needed, they've been arguing against locking into anything yet, given this recession's highly unusual and unpredictable nature.
The Finance Department's caution is in keeping with its typical role within government, especially when the government has already run up a massive deficit just dealing with the pandemic's immediate fallout. And the point about unpredictability is a totally fair one, given the unknowns around how long it will take for a return to something resembling normalcy, and which sectors will have the hardest time recovering absent public funds.
But such considerations haven't stopped other governments that are committed to addressing climate change from, at minimum, trial-ballooning various ways to emerge from this situation with cleaner economies than their countries entered it, and in the process actively participating in a global conversation about postpandemic economic and climate policy.
With the Liberals thus far declining to do that, outside organizations have somewhat stepped into the void. At the end of June, the "clean capitalism" advocacy company Corporate Knights published an impressively detailed report calling for more than $100billion in spending - on everything from building retrofits and transportation electrification, to decarbonizing heavy industry and upgrading power grids - that it claimed would create more than six million person-years of green employment over the next decade. Another report in a similar vein is due for release this month from the Task Force for a Resilient Recovery, a joint effort by several environmental think tanks.
So Ottawa will have plenty to draw from, if it wants to do so. But that doesn't quite seem a substitute for the government doing the work itself. It raises the risk of decision makers latching onto others' ideas at the last minute, without fully thinking them through, if they suddenly feel more urgency to roll out policies.
At the least, the Liberals are passing up an opportunity to engage Canadians in deciding what kind of economy they want coming out of this, to gauge their appetite for a potentially bumpy transition to something more sustainable than what existed before, to figure out how different options land when they talk about them out loud.
Mr. Trudeau once promised to be a world leader in confronting the existential challenge that will be with us long past the current health crisis. There is still time for him to make good on the best opportunity he will ever have on that front, but so far he's acting like a follower at best.

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document




Lame-duck Bush tries to change subject; A State of the Union on climate change? ALAN FREEMAN sees a leader facing new political realities
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 24, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 719 words
Byline: ALAN FREEMAN
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 First, he changed his defence secretary. Then, he changed the generals in charge of the Iraq war. Finally, he changed his military strategy. 
 Yesterday, President George W. Bush tried to change the subject. 
 After five years of using the annual State of the Union address to press the case for war against terrorism, to justify invading Iraq and then to explain why the occupation had gone so wrong, Mr. Bush decided to emphasize domestic strategy. 
 Sure, there was the requisite reminder to Americans that the Middle East conflict "is a decisive ideological struggle, and the security of our nation is in the balance" and a promise to increase the permanent strength of the U.S. military by 92,000 soldiers. But the real emphasis was on issues such as health care, education - even climate change. 
 Yes, climate change. After years of dismissing global warming as crackpot science, Mr. Bush's administration appears to have found religion, so to speak. According to the White House, Mr. Bush's new energy policy "will help confront climate change by stopping the projected growth of carbon dioxide emissions from cars, light trucks and SUVs within 10 years." 
 And Mr. Bush, who comes from Texas, where 25 per cent of people have no health insurance at all, now says he favours "affordable and available health care." 
 Has he gone soft? Chucked his tax-slashing, right-wing philosophy and become a big-government liberal? Hardly. 
 What has happened is that Mr. Bush is facing the political reality of a lame-duck presidency with an approval rating vying for the bargain-basement lows of Richard Nixon in the midst of the Watergate scandal. 
 With a resurgent Democratic Party in control of the House of Representatives and Senate, Mr. Bush has recognized that if he is to get anything done during the next two years, he will have to at least appear to make nice with the opposition. 
 White House counsellor Dan Bartlett said bravely yesterday that "the power of ideas can transcend partisan differences in Washington," a nice way of saying that his boss has little chance of getting any policies through Congress unless he can make them palatable to the Democrats. By putting health care and energy conservation at the top of his domestic agenda, Mr. Bush wants to give the illusion that he has moved to the centre of the political spectrum. But it is only an illusion. 
 His health-care proposal is a case in point. More than 46 million Americans have no health insurance. That's largely because they are too poor to afford coverage or their employers don't want to spend the money to provide it for them. 
 Mr. Bush's solution is not universal health care - far from it. His real goal is to further privatize the U.S. health-care system and lighten the burden on employers by making employer-provided health care a taxable benefit for the first time, thereby encouraging cutbacks in the most generous plans. 
 Basic health care could be provided tax-free, but the most extensive plans would be subject to taxation, meaning many middle-class Americans would either have to pay higher taxes or choose less-inclusive plans. There would also be a tax break for those who buy their own health insurance, supposedly making coverage cheaper for the poor. 
 As with Mr. Bush's ill-fated attempt to privatize the Social Security system in 2005, the goal is to undermine the country's already flimsy social safety net through privatization. 
 Likewise, his energy proposal is not what it seems. His lofty goal is to reduce gasoline consumption by 20 per cent during the next 10 years. It may sound impressive but again, it's more fog than fact. 
 It turns out the cut is not from the current level of consumption but from what consumption is "projected" to be in 2017. And three-quarters of this "cut" actually comes from replacing gasoline with ethanol, produced largely from corn, a huge boon to Mr. Bush's friends in farm country. 
 While producing ethanol may reduce the need to import petroleum from abroad, ethanol production requires huge amounts of energy, including electricity from coal-fired power plants. So much for reducing greenhouse gases. 
 In any case, the details of all these proposals are all largely besides the point, because a defanged Mr. Bush has little or no chance of getting any of them passed into law. 

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: January 24, 2007


End of Document




SCIENCE FICTION The day the Earth warmed up  We all learned in science class that hypotheses are supposed to be tested against observation. But in the global-warming debate, it appears this simple axiom does not apply: Climate change has become an article of faith
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
November 22, 1997 Saturday


Copyright 1997 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS; Pg. D1
Length: 3514 words
Byline: BY GUY CRITTENDEN 
Dateline: Toronto 
Body


A FUNNY thing happened on the way to the international global-warming conference: The Earth failed to heat up.
Yes, you heard correctly. Over the past decade, the Earth's average surface temperature has increased by zero. Nothing. Nada. In fact, there's evidence that it's actually cooled a bit.
But you wouldn't know that from the confusing media coverage of the climate-change question. The debate about whether the burning of fossil fuels is having any effect on the atmosphere has become increasingly polarized with the approach of the Dec. 1 summit in Kyoto, Japan, of the (take a deep breath) Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Party delegates are not meeting to chew over the science of the issue. They already agreed in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, and in Berlin in 1994, to stabilize the atmospheric release of heat-trapping "greenhouse gases," such as carbon dioxide and methane, at 1990 levels. This was to protect us from the supposed danger of being fried in a planetary convection oven. Rather, they are meeting to negotiate a legally binding deadline, likely extending the original voluntary one of the year 2000 by about 10 years.
The Europeans (for whom this is very much a trade issue because of their more diversified energy economies) are pushing hardest. U.S. President Bill Clinton supports the targets, but the U.S. position is that it won't sign the treaty unless developing nations, which will contribute to the greatest increase in emissions in the years to come, agree to some obligations in Kyoto.
Prime Minister Jean Chrétien apparently wants to outdo the Americans and, at a recent meeting, federal and provincial environment ministers agreed to endorse the UN stabilization plan and revised deadline. Only Quebec objected, saying the measures don't go far enough.
Yet Canada is behind the eight ball. Despite voluntary industry initiatives, Natural Resources Canada projects emissions will be 8.2 per cent higher in the year 2000 than in 1990, and 36 per cent higher by 2020. Reversing the trend will be costly. Emission limits, trade sanctions and special taxes could have a profound impact on Canada's resource-dependent economy, especially on the steel and aluminum industries, energy production, transportation, cattle farming and agriculture. To appease Alberta, Mr. Chrétien recently ruled out a well-head carbon tax, but other taxes could force retail fuel prices to soar.
This is serious stuff.
The Conference Board of Canada predicts compliance measures needed to return emissions to 1990 levels will reduce Canada's annual economic growth by $5.4-billion to $30-billion by the year 2010. An economic simulation prepared for Environment Canada by DRI/McGraw Hill suggests stabilization would require a phased-in 50-per-cent hike in energy prices.
As a result, between now and 2012, the economy could underperform to the tune of $150-billion, with living standards lowered by higher prices and interests rates, plus a weak Canadian dollar.
Though we will all be asked to accept such sacrifices, it's difficult for the lay person to determine whether or not the science behind the climate-change theory is sound. Environmentalists, some scientists and politicians argue -- passionately -- that the phenomenon is real. Oil companies, certain scientists and other politicians counter -- just as passionately -- that it's all a bunch of hooey.
Who's right?
The answer, of course, lies in the evidence. When I agreed to research and write this story, I had not formed an opinion one way or the other. But as this environmental detective story unfolded, I found that both sides -- the environmentalists and the industry lobby groups -- have been self-serving and subjective.
The evidence appears to have been tampered with, the jury rigged. Politicians, UN bureaucrats and some scientists have tried to discredit skeptical scientists (aren't scientists supposed to be skeptical?) for challenging the conventional wisdom.
We all learned in science class that hypotheses are supposed to be tested against observation. But in the global-warming debate, it appears this simple axiom does not apply: Climate change has become an article of faith.
The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change forecasts a rise in global temperature of between 0.8 and 3.5 degrees if something doesn't halt the doubling of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere expected in the next century. (This is down from earlier estimates of 1.5 to 4.5 degrees).
By now, we're all familiar with the presumed Doomsday that will result if this happens. In a speech this month, Mr. Chrétien compared the oil companies to the tobacco giants in their denial of their products' harmful effects, then reminded his audience that, "If we do not take action, climate change will create droughts, floods and other disasters around the world. It will create unprecedented tides of refugees." He didn't belabour the other alleged consequences, which include: violent storms, tornadoes, forest fires, crop failures, rising sea levels and plagues spread by mosquitoes that will migrate into formerly frigid regions. 
   GLOBAL-warming theory originated in the writings of 19th-century French mathematician and scientist Jean Fourier, and was given modern credence in 1988 when NASA climatologist Jim Hansen testified before the U.S. Congress that the summer drought that year was attributable in part to global warming.
A number of groups soon discovered they could profit from the bad news. Environmental organizations such as Greenpeace have found the apocalyptic scenario is the best fundraising tool since baby seals. Greenpeace has organized expeditions at both ends of the Earth to report on everything from melting icecaps in Antarctica to thawing permafrost in the Mackenzie River Basin.
The Suzuki Foundation's Climate Change Campaign has run splashy ads calling global warming "the most urgent slow-motion catastrophe facing mankind." The mosquito story was given special emphasis in the ads, as was the opportunity to make donations. (The mosquito theory was recently discredited in the Nov. 7 issue of the journal Science.)
Government scientists have cashed in too. The U.S. government doles out more than $2-billion each year for researchers to study the issue. In Canada, government departments and universities have benefited from an $85-million Global Warming Strategy fund established in 1992 under the Federal Green Plan, among other revenues. This doesn't mean their agenda amounts to malfeasance; only that, with other funding spigots turned off, scientists in the public service have a vested interest in producing research that remains "inconclusive" so that they can continue to attract funding.
For many politicians, the scientific case is closed. On July 26, President Clinton opened a White House conference on the subject with the announcement that "The overwhelming balance of evidence and scientific opinion is that it is no longer a theory but now a fact that global warming is real." He cited the supposed consensus of 2,500 scientists in an oft-cited report of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Vice-President Al Gore seems to attribute every extreme weather event to global climate change. On one occasion, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt even stated that skeptics of the Clinton administration's global-warming proposals are "un-American in the most basic sense."
With these endorsements, is it any wonder ordinary folk are scared out of their wits and tell pollsters they support strong government action? However, before you start building your own sea wall against a future Water World, there are a few things to consider.
First, the growing "consensus of scientists" mentioned by Mr. Clinton (and just about every uncritical news story) is a complete myth. Climate change is hotly debated among scientists, and the list of skeptics is growing. Leading the charge are four renowned climatologists: Dr. Patrick J. Michaels of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, North Carolina; Dr. Robert Balling, a climatology professor at Arizona State University in Tempe; Dr. Richard Lindzen, Alfred P. Sloan professor of meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston; and Dr. Fred Singer, distinguished research professor at George Mason University and professor emeritus of environmental science at the University of Virginia.
These four horsemen of the nonapocalypse speak at conferences, testify before Congress and publish papers that use real-world measurements to effectively skewer the computer-driven climate projections of their peers, including those of the UN panel. A few of them receive some funding from fossil-fuel companies and are therefore dismissed by environmentalists as industry shills or tools of the U.S. anti-environmental "wise use" movement.
But discrediting these scientists because of their funding instead of their work is hardly credible. Their papers are peer-reviewed and appear in respected journals such as Science and Nature. Less than 5 per cent of Dr. Singer's annual budget comes from oil companies (a $5,000 donation from Exxon). In fact, environmental groups themselves receive millions of dollars in corporate donations. Does this mean their message is tainted?
In any case, the evidence (as opposed to the theory) is increasingly supportive of the observations of these modern-day Galileos, once dismissed as a "small and noisy band of skeptics."
In 1995, the UN panel released a thick report containing sections in which scientists took pains to state that global warming and climate change are not yet proven. But politicians and environmental groups never quote these sections. Instead, they seize upon a statement -- that human activities are having a "discernible effect" on the atmosphere -- appearing in the Policymaker's Summary written by a small group that included UN bureaucrats and other non-scientists.
Says Dr. Patrick Michaels: "The 'discernible effect' statement may be politically sensational, but it's scientifically bankrupt." He and others accused the writers of the Policymaker's Summary of spin-doctoring and of deliberately playing down the high degree of scientific uncertainty about the global-warming theory.
Dr. Fred Singer argues that the report does not represent a "consensus of 2,500 scientists," pointing out that its 11 chapters were written by only about 80 authors. Most of the hundreds of "contributors" listed are simply experts who allowed their studies to be quoted without necessarily supporting the report's conclusions.
Says Dr. Frederick Seitz, "In my more than 60 years as a member of the American scientific community, including service as president of both the National Academy of Sciences and the American Physical Society, I have never witnessed a more disturbing corruption of the peer-review process."
At an international meeting in 1995, 100 climatologists showed that they were fed up with the way bureaucrats had distorted their research by signing a Leipzig Declaration, which expressed their anger over the unreliable global-warming projections generated through computer-based General Circulation Models. Yet the politicians and the media continue to refer to the "consensus of scientists."
Climate-change skeptics agree that Earth's average temperatures have risen by a modest 0.3 to 0.6 degrees in the 140 years since records began. But they point out that most of this warming occurred before 1940 and was followed by decades of climate cooling, from about 1940 through the 1960s, at a time when greenhouse-gas emissions actually increased. Many climatologists feared the world was heading toward a mini-ice age. Even the UN panel's chairman Bert Bolin admits that the pre-1940 warming is probably a natural recovery from an earlier natural cooling.
Indeed, of the 96 years of this century, so far 32 show a warming trend and 64 a cooling. The warming has not been evenly distributed. Some parts of the globe have not warmed at all, while others, like Canada's interior and the Antarctic Peninsula, appear to have warmed by one and two degrees respectively.
But the most damning evidence concerns the past decade. Weather satellites have detected no increase at all. On the contrary, they indicate a cooling of 0.13 since 1979, and the data are independently verified by weather-balloon records as well as the readings of ground-level instruments calibrated to account for urban "heat island" effects.
Dr. Michaels is unequivocal: "The perfect agreement between the satellite data and the weather balloons has been extremely humiliating for the global-warming proponents . . . Even worse for them, the land-surface records of the past decade show a warming of zero."
But the other side is not backing down. Dr. Gordon McBean is assistant deputy minister in the atmospheric environmental service of Environment Canada and formerly chaired the international World Climate Research Program. While he doesn't dispute the accuracy of the satellite data, he feels the skeptics have reached the wrong conclusions. "It's inappropriate to judge long-term global-warming trends from satellite records that only began in about 1979," he says. Dr. McBean argues that changes in the atmosphere indicate that human actions are affecting the climate in ways that solar spots or volcanic activity would not. "Our computer models now give a reasonable simulation of the climate since about 1900 and, though the amount of climate change predicted varies, they all indicate it will occur."
Dr. Michaels observes that this kind of explanation is typical of "consensus" scientists. "Scientists are supposed to look at evidence, not run from it," he says, adding, "When the temperature didn't go up as predicted, the increasingly desperate and shrill apologists for the warming theory changed their mantra to the vague message of climate change." Dr. Michaels and other skeptics also point out that there is no evidence at all that Earth has suffered from an increase in violent weather. For instance, studies of anemometer readings used to gauge hurricanes since the Second World War show a decline in the strength of tropical storms, not an increase.
It's a touchy issue. Hurricane Andrew, in 1992, was the most expensive U.S. disaster ever, causing $30-billion (U.S.) in damage. But is this because the weather is worse or because more people inhabit Florida's coastline than decades ago? Atlantic hurricane activity over the warming period between 1970 and 1987 was less than half the activity observed for the cooling period between 1947 and 1969.
There is no consensus in the insurance industry that climate change is upon us. U.S. insurance and reinsurance companies (among the most affected) remain particularly skeptical. Even the UN panel report states: "Overall, there is no evidence that extreme weather events, or climate variability, have increased, in a global sense through the 20th century, although data and analysis are poor and not comprehensive."
Dr. Singer points out that: "A small rise in sea levels of about 18 centimetres per century has been observed for several centuries, but there is evidence that this derives from the drifting of continental plates and subsequent tectonic changes in the shape of the ocean basin, not from the thermal expansion of sea water." He says that during the warming period between 1900 and 1940, there was actually a drop in sea levels indicating that global warming, if it occurs, could in fact slow any rise in sea levels.
Another troubling question is one that the UN Intergovernmental Panel's report fully acknowledges: Even if the climate is changing, it's impossible to say to what (if any) extent human beings are influencing what might be natural variation.
Change is inevitable for climate, especially if one takes a long-term view. Ice ages occur roughly every 100,000 years, followed by warm periods lasting 10,000 to 12,000 years. Even the warm periods experience wild fluctuations. Between 5,000 and 8,000 years ago, Earth went through long periods that were two to three degrees hotter than today. Paleoclimatologists at the University of Maine have discovered from fossils that the climate of the Prairies took a sudden turn for the better about 800 years ago after 1,500 years of dust-bowl conditions. The abrupt change from dry to wet cycles, they say, may be connected to different moon and sun cycles. What is now the arid Sahara desert was once a swampy land populated by hippos and crocodiles.
Had a fine English wine recently? Doubtful. Yet, records show that a few hundred years ago England's climate was ideal for growing grapes. This was during a short-lived hot spell in the middle of what climatologists call the Little Ice Age, which lasted from the early 1400s to about 1850. This period suggests that cold climates, not warm, spawn the most violent weather. Severe storms in the North Sea in 1421 and 1446 claimed 100,000 lives, while a storm in 1570 claimed more than 400,000.
Earth temperatures closely correlate to sunspot and solar-flare activity, which occurs in cycles of roughly 11 years within much longer trends. When the number of sunspots was sharply reduced between 1640 and 1720, our planet cooled about 1.1 degrees and Europe was plunged into a deep freeze. Glaciers and winters lengthened, and English paintings from the time show people skating on the Thames River and celebrating freezings with Frost Fairs. In pioneer days, people walked in winter from Staten Island to Manhattan across a frozen New York harbour.
Experts at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington say that about 50 per cent of the climate change since 1850 can be attributed to the sun, and average temperatures since the Second World War have closely tracked sunspot cycles. Complicating matters, geophysicists at the University of Hawaii claim that increased undersea seismicity and volcanic activity on the Pacific Ocean floor may be contributing to the appearance of strong El Nino weather events in recent years.
So, what should we do?
The conclusion of Volume 3 of the UN Panel report states: "A prudent way to deal with climate change is through a portfolio of actions aimed at mitigation, adaptation and improvement of knowledge. The appropriate portfolio will differ for each country. The challenge is not to find the best policy today for the next 100 years, but to select a prudent strategy and to adjust it over time in light of new information."
That certainly sounds reasonable. Given all the evidence that contradicts the theory that the Earth is warming, that the climate is changing, and that mankind is the cause, perhaps the Canadian delegation in Kyoto should argue that the global-warming hypothesis needs to be revised. A prudent strategy for Canada would be to monitor the situation, but any decision to limit greenhouse-gas emissions would be premature and should be shelved. 
Guy Crittenden is editor-in-chief of Hazardous Waste Materials Management magazine and Solid Waste and Recycling magazine in Markham, Ont.
Climate-change diary
Fall, 1990, Geneva: The First Scientific Assessment of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (formed in 1988) lays the foundation for the Rio Treaty.
June, 1992, Rio de Janeiro: Some 154 Earth Summit delegates sign the UN Framework Con-vention on Climate Change, agreeing to stabilize greenhouse-gas emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
April, 1995, Berlin: The First Conference of the Parties to the 1992 UN convention strengthen their commitment to the Rio Treaty with the Berlin Mandate.
November, 1995, Leipzig, Germany: One-hundred independent climatologists sign the Leip-zig Declaration to protest the distortion of atmospheric science by bureaucrats in the service of political agendas.
July, 1996, Geneva: The Second Conference of the Parties leads to the Geneva Declaration, which calls for the post-2000 commitments to be legally binding.
June, 1997, Denver, Colorado: At a summit of G7 nations, Canada, the U.S. and Japan agree to modify their earlier commitments and push for a10-year extension to the emissions dead-line.
 Dec.1-10, 1997, Kyoto, Japan: The Third Conference of the Parties will negotiate legally binding greenhouse-gas reduction targets and strict timetables as agreed in the Geneva Decla-ration, likely extending the 2000 stabilization deadline to 2010 or 2012.
Related reading
Hot Talk, Cold Science: Global Warming's Unfinished Debate 
   by Dr. S. Fred Singer (Independent Institute, 1997) 
   Sound & Fury: The Science and Politics of Global Warming 
   by Dr. Patrick Michaels (Cato Institute, 1992) 
   Earth in the Balance 
   by Al Gore (Thomas Allen & Son, 1992)
Related Web sites
Dr. S. Fred Singer's Science & Environmental Policy Project 
   (www.his.com/~sepp) 
   Dr. Patrick Michael's World Climate Report (            http://www.nhes.com ) 
   Environment Canada (            http://www.ec.gc.ca ) 
   UN Framework Convention on Climate Change Secretariat (            http://www.unfccc.de ) 
   Greenpeace International (            http://www.greenpeace.org ) 
   Worldwatch Institute (            http://www.worldwatch.org )

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: December 5, 2006


End of Document




A questionable truth; Most scientists now agree climate change is real - but they disagree on nearly everything else about it, from its severity to its solutions. MARGARET WENTE argues that Al Gore and other advocates are confusing the public with 'environmental alarmism'
The Globe and Mail (Canada)
January 27, 2007 Saturday


Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FOCUS COLUMN SPECIAL REPORT; THE NEW CLIMATE; Pg. F1
Length: 2506 words
Byline: MARGARET WENTE
Body


An Inconvenient Truth, the hugely influential documentary starring Al Gore, is a shoo-in for an Oscar. Its riveting depictions of violent storms, collapsing ice mountains and parched deserts have scared millions of people into believing that the world faces a catastrophic fate unless we make dramatic changes to our way of life, starting now. 
 Climate change has made its way onto the agenda of every developed nation, even the United States, where some of the nation's biggest businesses, including energy companies, are pressing the government to take action. It even figured in George W. Bush's State of the Union speech this week. 
 And next week the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will unleash another storm of headlines when it releases its latest consensus of scientific findings, stressing even more emphatically that human activity is causing global temperatures to rise. 
 Is the sky really falling? How fast and how hard? And if the vast majority of scientists agree, then why don't governments act? After all, nobody wants the world to melt. 
 If you're an average, concerned citizen, no one will blame you for being confused or angry. The global-warming debate has become so shrill, so political and so polarized that it's impossible for even a reasonably well-informed person to figure out who or what to believe. Only one thing is for sure: Science isn't all that is driving this debate. Politics, ideology and scaremongering are too. 
 Because I'm skeptical by nature, I've always discounted the environmental catastrophists. Their message is religious, not rational. But I've also spoken to enough brainy scientists to conclude that human activity is affecting the climate and that global warming is for real. 
 That's the famous consensus you keep hearing about. But that's where the consensus ends. Beyond that, the science is very far from settled. Scientists themselves are deeply split about how alarmed we should be, the nature of the threats we face, how imminent those threats are and what to do about them.
 For apocalyptic predictions, you need only look to the bestseller list. Tim Flannery (The Weather Makers) and George Monbiot (Heat) both warn that civilization will collapse if we do nothing. So does Canada's David Suzuki. In Britain, James Lovelock argues that the Earth has already caught a "morbid fever," and that "we are in a fool's climate and before this century is over billions of us will die." 
 But many scientists are alarmed at the alarmism, and warn that catastrophic scenarios like the ones in Al Gore's film have pushed the science way too far. Kevin Vranes, a climate scientist who specializes in ocean/climate physics and water-resources management, has said, "Some of us are wondering if we have created a monster." 
 Last fall, Professor Mike Hulme, the founding director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research in Britain, wrote a damning condemnation of climate alarmism: "Over the past few years, a new environmental phenomenon has been constructed in this country - the phenomenon of 'catastrophic' climate change," he wrote. "The increasing use of this term and its bedfellow qualifiers 'chaotic,' 'irreversible' and 'rapid' has altered the public discourse, [which] is now characterized by phrases such as 'irreversible tipping in the Earth's climate' and 'we are at the point of no return.' " 
 Prof. Hulme is no climate skeptic. He was the co-ordinating lead author of the chapter on "climate-change scenarios" for the last IPCC report in 2001. 
 To try to get a grip, I checked in with eight leading climate scientists, climate economists and climate-policy analysts. All believe that man-made climate change is a serious issue that demands action. And all reject the extremists at both ends. They represent the broad middle ground - the people whose voices have been all but drowned out by the shouting. 
 The first thing they stress is that while climate change is certain, what will actually happen is not. For example, scientists are pretty sure that sea levels will rise, and rising seas will pose a threat to coastal areas. But how much will they rise, and how fast, and where will they rise most? Sorry. Science can't tell you that.
 "Nobody can really tell you what the probabilities are," says Carl Wunsch, a leading climate and oceans expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "The probability of another metre of sea-level rise in the next 50 years isn't zero, but it isn't 90 per cent, either. And if you pinned me down to tell you what it really is, I couldn't do that."
 Robert Mendelsohn is an environmental scientist at Yale who specializes in modelling the regional impacts of climate change. "The drought issues are one of the great uncertainties," he says. "We know precipitation will increase, but we don't know exactly where."
 The very great uncertainty of long-term climate impacts is a point that often gets lost in the debate. The scenarios range from mild to severe, but it's the extreme ones that get the ink.
 On top of that, many scientists say the average global surface temperature (which is the most popular way to talk about global warming) doesn't tell us very much at all about what's going to happen in any given region of the globe. "It's almost useless for what people care about, which is their growing season and how they live," says Roger Pielke Sr., professor of climatology at Colorado State University and the state's official climatologist. 
 Dr. Pielke is steeped in decades of climate research. And he points out that carbon-dioxide emissions are just one of many man-made impacts on the climate. Land-use changes are another. "There are a lot of things that humans are doing to the climate beyond CO{-2}, and we don't understand them," he says. 
 We also don't know enough to say with any degree of certainty whether taking action X will produce result Y. "Say you spend a trillion dollars to limit CO{-2} emissions. Will you be able to limit the sea-level rise, or droughts?" Prof. Wunsch says. "People are asking questions of the science that science can't answer." (For the record, he believes that rising seas could cause "an awful lot of damage to an awful lot of people.")
 Science can, and must, inform policy decisions. But science by itself can't tell us what to do. What to do is a matter of great (and understandable) dispute, and making policy to deal with climate change is fraught with all kinds of real-world complications. Figuring out smart policies to adopt is hard, and implementing them is even harder. It's all very well to sign on to the Kyoto Protocol. But if nobody complies, then what's the point?
 All this doesn't mean we should throw up our hands and give up. The challenge is to figure out what actions are feasible and give us a reasonable insurance policy against disaster. 
 At this point, most people say: Well, obviously we've got to start cutting greenhouse-gas emissions as fast as possible. Surely that's the way to make a difference.
 This is one of the most common misunderstandings in the global-warming debate. To explain why, I called on Roger Pielke Jr., a leading climate-policy expert (and, coincidentally, Roger Sr.'s son.)
 He supplied this analogy: Imagine that you are filling up a bathtub. Right now, it is 380 inches deep. You are filling up the tub at a rate that adds seven inches every year. The drain at the bottom lets out the equivalent of two inches a year.
 Under these conditions, the bathtub will keep filling up at a rate of five inches a year. If we cut the rate of filling by, say, 20 per cent, to 5.6 inches per year, the bathtub will keep filling up by 3.6 inches a year. Cuts in the rate of filling do not mean that the level in the tub will go down. In fact, if you cut the rate of filling to zero, it will still take quite a while for the tub to drain down to, say, 280 inches. 
 Now, substitute CO{-2} concentrations for tub depth and emissions for water, and you have a rough analogy to the climate system. Carbon cuts will have an impact - but not for many, many years, because they represent only a tiny fraction of the total CO{-2} that's already in the atmosphere.
 " 'Stop global warming' is a non-sequitur," Prof. Pielke says. "Any emissions reductions won't have a perceptible impact on climate in our lifetimes. It's quite misleading, as Al Gore suggests, to say that if we drive a hybrid or change our light bulbs, we can reduce the risk from hurricanes." 
 The climate debate focuses almost entirely on mitigation (how we can slow down global warming). But climate scientists and policy experts say that in the short term - our lifetimes - our most important insurance policy is adaptation. Nothing we do to cut emissions will reduce the risk from hurricanes or rising seas in the short term. But there are other ways to reduce the risk. We can build storm-surge defences, stop building in coastal areas and make sure we protect our fresh-water supplies from salination. We also can develop crops that will do well in hotter climates.
 "Adaptation" is not a word that figures much in climate-change debates. Activists (and much of the general public) think it sounds lazy and defeatist. But the experts talk about adaptation all the time.
 "Climate-change policy requires that both of these issues - adaptation and carbon reduction - be addressed simultaneously," Yale's Prof. Mendelsohn says.
 He adds another unpopular observation: Climate change won't necessarily be all bad. Moderate warming would even have some benefits. Large parts of Canada would become far more pleasant, with longer growing seasons, more arable land and warmer winters. Our energy consumption would go down, as would our heating bills. "The magnitude of the good things could be very large for Canada," he says, while hastening to add that he hopes we are altruistic enough to curb our greenhouse-gas emissions anyway. 
 For the record, all these experts are highly critical of An Inconvenient Truth and the scary headlines that regularly sweep the media. (Climate alarmism sells, and the media know it.)
 Prof. Wunsch, the ocean-currents expert, says that despite what Mr. Gore asserts, there is no chance whatsoever that the Gulf Stream will slow down or stop. Nor did Hurricane Katrina have any link with global warming, nor do this winter's storms and other strange weather. There are enough real worries about climate change that we don't have to invent imaginary ones.
 There's something else on which the middle ground agrees. Curbing CO{-2} is in fact a very wise and prudent thing to do. Call it an insurance policy for the long term.
 How to do that? We're back to policy again, and consensus is hard to find. But climate economists generally agree that the first and most important thing to do is put a value on the atmosphere. You do this with carbon taxes and emissions caps. If emitting carbon costs money, then people will have a big incentive to cut down on it.
 Mark Jaccard is a professor of resource and environmental management at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, and also the author of an award-winning book called Sustainable Fossil Fuels. It's not a zippy read like The Weather Makers, but it's way more important, and Prof. Jaccard is in big demand these days among people wrestling with climate policy.
 He argues that the best way to cut down on emissions is to clean up fossil fuels - which, like it or not, will still be our main source of energy for the next few decades. Cleaning up fossil fuels is far more feasible than, say, imagining we can replace them any time soon with wind or solar or biomass or hydrogen.
 How to clean up fossil fuels? Tell the energy industry that it must capture a growing amount of the carbon it emits, by scrubbing it out or dumping it back into the ground. Set the targets and let the industry figure out how to meet them. Start gradually and ramp up. Small changes starting now will reap huge benefits down the road - not in time for the next hurricane season, but in generations to come.
 This is not as sexy as putting solar panels on your roof or riding your bike to work. But it's actually a better solution to the problem. California's Arnold Schwarzenegger is doing this already, by imposing carbon-reduction targets on the automakers. "They're market-oriented regulations," Prof. Jaccard says. "What he says is, 'You guys figure out how to get it done.' "
 By the way, Prof. Jaccard and other climate economists agree we should have started taking this type of action years ago, and they blast both business and governments for not getting off the dime.
 Other experts have different (but not incompatible) takes. "We need to break out the challenges of energy policy and adaptation into many tens of thousands of parts," Roger Pielke Jr. says. Despite the many uncertainties, we don't need to wait to act, if only because many of the things we should do are worth doing on their own. For example, reducing our reliance on fossil fuels from unstable parts of the world - through substitution, conservation and new technologies - is a no-brainer.
 But what about the alarmists? The ones who argue that the only way to save the planet is to stop driving, stop flying and stop consuming? Prof. Jaccard (who told me that he himself tries to live with a "small material footprint") says: "Environmental activists are using climate change to wrap around their message about how they want humans to behave differently."
 In other words, it's not just carbon emissions they object to. It's our whole materialist, growth-oriented, SUV-driving way of life. For this reason, he argues that people like Tim Flannery are actually dangerous. "He gives people the impression that putting solar panels on your roof is actually a solution to the problem. And it's not." 
 Here's another thought from Yale's Robert Mendelsohn. "The mistake Al Gore and others are making is to look at the cumulative effects of all the emissions over the next 100 years if we do nothing. And they say that will be really bad. And they may well be right. But the economics of this is that the damage from emissions now is quite small. So what we ought to be doing now is relatively mild things that don't cost very much. You should start slow and get increasingly strict over time." 
 Mark Jaccard agrees. In fact, he argues that if we start to do the right things now, we will scarcely notice because adjustment will be gradual. The important thing is to get started. Now.
 So what can a worried citizen do? "Lobby the politicians to put policies in place immediately that put a value on the environment," he says. "Drive your car to Ottawa if you have to. The most important thing is to get policies in place that are intelligent." And go ahead and ride your bike to work. At the very least, it will be good for your health. 
 As for Al Gore, here's one prediction you can bank on: Even though much of what he says is dubious or just plain wrong, he's going to win that Oscar anyway.
Margaret Wente is a columnist for The Globe and Mail.

Graphic

 
Illustration

Load-Date: January 27, 2007


End of Document
